<!-- 


-->


Materials and methods                                         
                                                              
Cell lines and cell culture                                   
                                                              
  All cell lines were obtained from the American Type         
Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA) except for       
                                   S. Krause et al. / Experi


in aliquots at 808C. Lectins conjugated to Alexa Fluor        
488, Helix pomatia agglutinin (HPA) and wheat germ            
agglutinin (WGA), were purchased from Molecular Probes.       
Recombinant rat GNE was expressed in Sf9 insect cells and
purified as described [23].                                   
                                                              
Immunofluorescence staining
                                                              
    Coverslips were briefly washed in PBS and fixed in        
3.7% formaldehyde (freshly prepared from paraformalde-        
hyde) in cytoskeleton (CSK) buffer, a microtubule-stabiliz-   
ing buffer (10 mM piperazine-N,N?-bis(2-ethanesulfonic        
acid), 100 mM NaCl, 10% sucrose, 10 mM EGTA, 2 mM             
MgCl2 in water at pH = 6.8) for 15 min at room                
temperature. Permeabilization was in 0.5% Triton X-100        
in CSK buffer for 10 min. After three washes in PBS,          
blocking of unspecific binding sites with 10% horse serum     
in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) for 1 h was followed by    
incubation with the primary antibodies diluted in PBS         
containing 5% horse serum for 1 h in a humid chamber.         
After three washes in PBS, the cells were incubated with      
the appropriate secondary antibodies conjugated to fluo-      
rescein isothiocyanate (FITC), Texas Red or Cy3. Alter-       
natively, for lectin staining, the cells were labeled with    
Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated HPA or WGA (100 Ag/ml).            
Finally, the coverslips were mounted in DAKO fluorescent      
mounting medium (DAKO, Carpinteria, CA, USA) and              
sealed with nail polish.                                      
    Monolayer cells were analyzed and photographed using a    
Zeiss Axiovert 200 M fluorescence microscope and a Zeiss      
AxioCam HR photocamera. For confocal laser scanning           
fluorescence microscopy, slides were evaluated with a         
Krypton-Argon laser (Leica TCS NT System, Leica Micro-        
systems, Mannheim, Germany) attached to a Leica DM            
IRB/E fluorescence microscope. Specificity controls con-      
sisted of replacement of primary antibodies by non-immune     
serum and of omitting the primary antibodies.
                                                              
Retroviral transfection
                                                              
   The cDNA encoding the entire human GNE protein             
fused to an N-terminal (FLAG)3-epitope was cloned into
the retroviral expression vector pLXSN (BD Biosciences
Clontech, Heidelberg, Germany) related to the Moloney         
human myoblasts (Muscle Tissue Culture Collection,
Friedrich-Baur-Institute, Munich, Germany). HeLa cells
(human cervical epithelioid carcinoma), HEK 293 cells
(human embryonal kidney), and TE671 cells (human
rhabdomyosarcoma) were grown in DulbeccoTs modified
Eagle medium (DMEM) supplemented with 2 mM l-
glutamine, 50 IU/ml penicillin, 50 mg/ml streptomycin
(PAA, Linz, Austria), and 10% FCS (GibcoBRL, Eggen-
stein, Germany). Human myoblasts were grown in skeletal
muscle growth medium, (SGM PromoCell, Heidelberg,
Germany) supplemented with 15% FCS. Jurkat cells
(human leukemia T cells) and K562 cells (human eryth-
roleukemia) were grown as suspension cultures in RPMI
1640 (GibcoBRL) supplemented with 10% FCS. Murine
embryonic stem cells carrying a homozygous or hetero-
zygous GNE gene knock-out were grown in monolayer as
described [13].
   For immunofluorescence staining, myoblasts were grown
in SGM on glass coverslips coated with bovine collagen
(Sigma). For maturation into multinucleated myotubes, they
were grown in SGM on coverslips coated with laminin
(Sigma) to near confluency and were induced to fuse and
differentiate by replacing SGM with DMEM supplemented
with 2% horse serum (fusion medium) for 48 h. For drug
treatment experiments, cells were incubated with 5 Ag/ml
brefeldin A (BFA) or 30 AM nocodazole for the times
indicated. For recovery, the cells were washed once in
DMEM supplemented with 10% FCS and maintained in the
same medium.
                                                              
Antibodies and reagents
                                                              
   A polyclonal antiserum was raised in rabbit against a
GNE peptide (Sigma-Genosys, Cambridgeshire, UK) com-
prising amino acids 588–607 coupled to keyhole limpet
hemocyanine (KLH) and affinity-purified against the
corresponding antigenic peptide. Mouse monoclonal anti-
bodies against golgin-97 (1 Ag/ml) was purchased from
Molecular Probes (Leiden, The Netherlands), anti-protein
disulfide isomerase (anti-PDI, 5 Ag/ml) was from Stressgen
(Victoria, Canada), and anti-CBP (anti-CREB-binding
protein) was purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology
(Santa Cruz, CA). Monoclonal antibodies against dystro-
phin rod domain (Dys1, amino acids 1181–1388), C-
terminal domain (Dys2, amino acids 3669–3685), and
actin binding domain (Dys3, amino acids 321–494) were
from Novocastra Laboratories (Newcastle upon Tyne, UK).
The secondary antibodies (Dianova, Hamburg, Germany)
were used as follows: fluorescein (FITC)-conjugated
donkey anti-mouse (1:100), Cy3-conjugated goat anti-
rabbit (1/200), and Texas Red-conjugated donkey anti-
rabbit (1:200). Nuclei were visualized using bisbenzimide
H 33258 (40 Ag/ml; Sigma).
   Nocodazole and brefeldin A (BFA) were purchased from
Sigma. Stock solutions of nocodazole in DMSO (30 mM)
and brefeldin A in absolute ethanol (10 mg/ml) were kept      
in aliquots at 808C. Lectins conjugated to Alexa Fluor         
488, Helix pomatia agglutinin (HPA) and wheat germ             
agglutinin (WGA), were purchased from Molecular Probes.        
Recombinant rat GNE was expressed in Sf9 insect cells and
purified as described [23].                                    
                                                               
Immunofluorescence staining
                                                               
    Coverslips were briefly washed in PBS and fixed in         
3.7% formaldehyde (freshly prepared from paraformalde-         
hyde) in cytoskeleton (CSK) buffer, a microtubule-stabiliz-    
ing buffer (10 mM piperazine-N,N’-bis(2-ethanesulfonic         
acid), 100 mM NaCl, 10% sucrose, 10 mM EGTA, 2 mM              
MgCl2 in water at pH = 6.8) for 15 min at room                 
temperature. Permeabilization was in 0.5% Triton X-100         
in CSK buffer for 10 min. After three washes in PBS,           
blocking of unspecific binding sites with 10% horse serum      
in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) for 1 h was followed by     
incubation with the primary antibodies diluted in PBS          
containing 5% horse serum for 1 h in a humid chamber.          
After three washes in PBS, the cells were incubated with       
the appropriate secondary antibodies conjugated to fluo-       
rescein isothiocyanate (FITC), Texas Red or Cy3. Alter-        
natively, for lectin staining, the cells were labeled with     
Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated HPA or WGA (100 Ag/ml).             
Finally, the coverslips were mounted in DAKO fluorescent       
mounting medium (DAKO, Carpinteria, CA, USA) and               
sealed with nail polish.                                       
    Monolayer cells were analyzed and photographed using a     
Zeiss Axiovert 200 M fluorescence microscope and a Zeiss       
AxioCam HR photocamera. For confocal laser scanning            
fluorescence microscopy, slides were evaluated with a          
Krypton-Argon laser (Leica TCS NT System, Leica Micro-         
systems, Mannheim, Germany) attached to a Leica DM             
IRB/E fluorescence microscope. Specificity controls con-       
sisted of replacement of primary antibodies by non-immune      
serum and of omitting the primary antibodies.
                                                               
Retroviral transfection
                                                               
   The cDNA encoding the entire human GNE protein              
fused to an N-terminal (FLAG)3-epitope was cloned into
the retroviral expression vector pLXSN (BD Biosciences
Clontech, Heidelberg, Germany) related to the Moloney          
murine leukemia virus under the control of a CMV
(cytomegalovirus) promoter. An amphotropic retrovirus          
was obtained by subsequent passaging in two producer           
cell lines (GP+E-86 and pA317 Ref. [24]). The titer was
1.6  105. (FLAG)3-GNE protein expression in the virus        
producer cell line was corroborated by immunoblot              
analysis of cell lysates detected with anti-FLAG (see          
below) and anti-GNE antibodies. Retroviral infection of        
HeLa cells was done at an multiplicity of infection (MOI)      
of 10–20 in DMEM without FCS containing 4 Ag/ml                
polybrene (hexadimethrine bromide, Sigma) for 6 h. For         
immunofluorescence staining, the recombinant protein was       
labeled with mouse anti-FLAG M2 monoclonal antibody
(20 Ag/ml, Sigma) and detected with FITC-conjugated
donkey anti-mouse antibody (1:100, Dianova).
                                                                        
Immunoblotting, peptide competition experiment, and cell
fractionation
                                                                        
   Cells were lysed at 48C in lysis buffer (20 mM Tris–HCl
pH 7.6, 1% NP-40, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA) including
freshly added protease inhibitors (1 mM phenymethyl
sulfonylfluoride, 0.5 Ag/ml leupeptin, 0.7 Ag/ml pepstatin,
1 mM benzamidine, Sigma). Flash frozen mouse tissues (6
month, C57BL/6) were ground to a fine powder in a mortar
using liquid nitrogen that was subsequently solubilized in
the same lysis buffer. After removal of cell debris by
centrifugation, protein content of the lysates was quantified
by the bicinchoninic acid method [25] using the BCA assay
reagent kit (Uptima, interchim, Montluçon, France).
Lysates equivalent to 30 Ag total protein were separated
by denaturing 7.5% SDS-PAGE and transferred to nitro-
cellulose (Schleicher and Schuell, Dassel, Germany) using
standard immunoblotting techniques. GNE was labeled
with the affinity-purified polyclonal rabbit antibody (10 Ag/
ml) for 1 h at room temperature. Immunoreactive bands
were detected by enhanced chemiluminescence after
incubation with horseradish peroxidase-conjugated goat
anti-rabbit secondary antibody (1:7000; Dianova). Each
immunoblot was repeated at least three times for independ-
ent samples.
   A peptide competition experiment was performed by
Western blot analysis using 20 Ag of affinity-purified anti-
GNE antibody in the presence of 1.3 and 13 Ag synthetic
GNE peptide (amino acids 588–607) corresponding to a
molar excess of 1:100 and 1:1000, respectively. Cytoplas-
mic and nuclear fractions of HeLa cells were prepared
according to Ref. [26].
                                                                        
Computational analysis
                                                                        
   The method of Cokol et al. [27] was performed to search
for putative nuclear localization signals.
                                                                        
                                                                        
Results
                                                                        
Differential GNE protein expression in mammalian cells
and tissues
                                                                        
    A polyclonal GNE antiserum was raised in rabbit
against a GNE peptide (aa 588–607). This peptide
sequence is conserved in human, rat and mouse. On
Western blots, a single protein band of about 79 kDa is
detected in crude extracts of mouse liver or fetal human
myoblasts (Fig. 1A). A dilution series of recombinant
His6-tagged GNE analyzed on the same Western blot
demonstrates that the GNE antiserum readily detects as                  
little as 1 ng GNE protein (Fig. 1A). The recombinant          
GNE migrates slower than the wild type protein (mouse          
liver and human myoblasts) due to the addition of a            
His6-tag. A double band in the recombinant GNE                 
preparation is evident if large protein amounts are loaded     
(Fig. 1 lanes 3–6), probably as a result of an unidentified    
posttranslational modification in insect cells. Competition    
experiments including preincubation of the antibody with       
both 100- and 1000-fold molar excess of the immuno-
genic peptide completely abolish the specific 79-kDa
signal (data not shown). Murine embryonic stem cells
carrying a GNE gene knock-out [13] completely lack the
79-kDa signal that is present both in wild type and in
heterozygous knock-out cells (data not shown). Therefore,
we conclude that the antiserum specifically detects a
protein corresponding to GNE.                            
    Immunoblot analysis of crude cell extracts from fetal               
human myoblasts and myotubes reveals high expression                    
of GNE (Fig. 1B, lanes 1 and 2). A weaker GNE signal                    
is present in extracts from human skeletal muscle (Fig.                 
1B, lanes 3 and 4). Human cancer and embryonal cell                     
lines also show strong GNE expression (Fig. 1B,
lanes 6–8).                                                             
    The GNE protein is differentially expressed in a
variety of mouse tissues as shown in a multiple murine                  
tissue Western blot (Fig. 1C) with highest levels in                    
cerebrum, cerebellum, liver, skeletal muscle, thymus, and               
testis. The GNE signals in liver, skeletal muscle, and                  
testis appear as a double band. This may indicate tissue-               
specific differences in splicing and/or posttranslational               
modification.                                                           
                                                                        
GNE localizes to the Golgi complex and the nucleus in a                 
variety of human cells                                                  
                                                                        
   Immunohistochemical analysis of human tissue and cell                
lines was performed to characterize the specific subcellular            
localization pattern of GNE. Immunofluorescence micro-                  
scopy using an affinity-purified anti-peptide antiserum                 
reveals that GNE localizes to nuclear and bright polarized              
juxtanuclear compartments on cryosections of human                      
skeletal muscle as well as in HeLa cells (Figs. 2A and C).              
The cytoplasmic juxtanuclear signal is suggestive of the                
Golgi complex. The antibody specifically detects GNE by                 
immunostaining as shown in a peptide competition experi-                
ment. Incubation of the GNE antibody with a synthetic GNE               
peptide (aa 588–607) prior to immunolabeling abolishes any              








signal sequence [32]. Simultaneous immunolabeling of                    
GNE and PDI reveals no marked colocalization                            
(Figs. 3K–M).                                                           
                                                                        
Brefeldin A and Nocodazole treatment displaces GNE along                
with Golgi complex markers                                              
                                                                        
   To elucidate the dynamics of the GNE association                     
with Golgi markers, the architecture of the Golgi                       
compartment was disturbed by drug treatment. Bre-                       
staining signal in the cytoplasm and the nucleus (Figs. 2
and D). Confocal imaging of human skeletal muscle
cryosections simultaneously stained with anti-GNE and
anti-dystrophin antibodies demonstrates GNE-labeling of
the myonuclei inside the sarcolemma.
                                                         
Colocalization of the GNE protein with the Golgi apparatu
                                                         
   To investigate the cytoplasmic localization of GNE in
more detail, colocalization studies were performed using
markers specific for various organelles. Lectins are usef
tools for staining Golgi structures by their selective af
for certain glycoprotein and glycolipid moieties that are
processed in the Golgi. Helix pomatia agglutinin (HPA)
and wheat germ agglutinin (WGA) are specific for
terminal N-acetylgalactosamine [28] and sialic acid resi-
dues [29], respectively. Conventional immunofluorescence
analysis of HeLa cells following double labeling of GNE
and glycoproteins with Alexa Fluor 488-conjugates of
WGA or HPA reveals partial overlap of GNE and lectin
staining in bright juxtanuclear structures (Figs. 3A–G)
suggestive of the Golgi complex. Additionally, GNE is
distributed more diffusely throughout the cytoplasm. To
confirm the association of GNE with the Golgi compart-
ment, confocal laser scanning microscopy demonstrates
partial colocalization of GNE and golgin-97 (Figs. 3H–J),
a Golgi-specific protein [30] that has been suggested to 
involved in membrane-tethering functions [31]. Protein
disulfide isomerase (PDI) was used as a marker for the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER). PDI is an abundant protein of
the ER containing a carboxy-terminal KDEL retention
                                                         
                                                         
                                                         
                                                         
                                                         
                                                         
                                                         
                                                         
feldin A (BFA) causes the Golgi stack to disappear
by redistributing both protein and lipid components to
the ER. Upon BFA treatment of HeLa cells for 1 h,
the intense juxtanuclear staining of GNE is abolished
(Fig. 4A compare to Fig. 3). GNE is distributed in
a punctuated perinuclear and cytoplasmic pattern
partially colocalizing with the Golgi marker golgin-
97 (Fig. 4C). Following BFA treatment for 1 h, the
cells were allowed to recover in the absence of the
drug for 1 and 2 h, respectively (Figs. 4D–I). As       
visualized by golgin-97 staining, the Golgi compart-                  
ment recovers its initial distribution (Fig. 4H). Note                
that the photographs in Fig. 4 were taken at higher                   
magnification and the Golgi compartment appears less                  
compact when compared to Fig. 3I. GNE partially                       
follows the golgin-97 redistribution into the reforming               
Golgi complex as indicated by co-immunolocalization                   
(Figs. 4F, I). Upon scattering of the Golgi by                        
treatment with the microtubule-depolymerizing drug                    
nocodazole, GNE remained associated with the Golgi                    
marker (Figs. 4J–L). The juxtanuclear array of Golgi                  
complexes is restored subsequent to recovery for 2 h                  
in the absence of the drug (Figs. 4M–O). The                          
nuclear distribution of GNE in HeLa cells during                      
nocodazole treatment and recovery is not homoge-                      
nous. About half of the cells display widespread                      
intense nuclear staining, whereas the GNE signal is                   
weaker or almost absent in the other half.                            
                                                                      
Immunolocalization of (FLAG)3-tagged GNE in the Golgi                 
compartment and the nucleus following transfection into               
HeLa cells                                                            
                                                                      
   To verify the localization of endogenous GNE                       
observed by immunofluorescence, we analyzed the                       
distribution of a recombinantly expressed N-terminally                
(FLAG) 3-tagged version of GNE. At about 50%                          
confluency, HeLa cells were transfected with an                       
amphotropic retrovirus containing GNE cDNA (coding
exons 2–12) under the control of a CMV promoter. The                  
cells were stained simultaneously with an anti-FLAG                   
antibody and the GNE antibody. Confocal laser scan-
ning microscopy revealed colocalization in the Golgi                  
and the nucleus (Fig. 5). Additionally, (FLAG)3-tagged                
GNE translation products were visualized in several                   
small clusters in the cytoplasm. Unlike endogenous                    
GNE, the FLAG-tagged construct marks the Golgi                        
complex more strongly than the nucleus.                               
                                                                      
The GNE antibody labels subnuclear domains that undergo               
changes in response to medium exchange and drug                       
treatment                                                             
                                                                      
   Unexpectedly, a large fraction of GNE is targeted to the           
nucleoplasm and a few intensely stained subnuclear domains            
of HeLa cells as observed by confocal microscopy (Figs. 3A,           
E, H, K). Upon BFA treatment disrupting the Golgi complex,
the nuclear distribution of GNE remains largely unchanged             
for 1 h (Fig. 4A), when compared to untreated HeLa cells              
(Fig. 3). During recovery from BFA, intensely staining                
nuclear domains become prominent after 2 h (Figs. 4D, G).             
Upon nocodazole treatment and recovery, the nuclear GNE
signal is heterogenous in the cell population. Nuclear GNE is         
nearly missing or weaker in about half of the cells and more          
prominent in the other half lacking any larger nuclear clusters       
(Figs. 4J, M).                                                        
   In general, the GNE-related nuclear staining pattern in
HeLa cells was variable (Figs. 3A, E, H, K) and changed
rapidly upon recovery from BFA treatment and during
exposure to nocodazole (Figs. 4D, G, J, M). These
findings prompted us to analyze HeLa cells in culture
over time. Cells were seeded at low density and
maintained for 6 days with one medium exchange on
day 4. For confocal microscopy analysis, the cells were
labeled for GNE and golgin-97. The nuclear GNE
distribution changes over time including increased cluster
formation and a decrease in diffuse nucleoplasmic
staining until day 4. The day following medium exchange
(day 5), GNE appears diffusely throughout the nucleo-
plasm concentrating in numerous smaller granules. On
day 6, GNE seems again redistributed into 1–3 large,
intensely labeled nuclear domains (data not shown).
   The relative nucleocytoplasmic distribution of GNE was
determined by cell fractionation of HeLa cells 1 and 2 days
after seeding. Purity of cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions
was confirmed by Western Blot analysis and subsequent
immunodetection of golgin-97 as cytoplasmic marker and C
responsive element-binding protein (CBP) as nuclear
marker protein (data not shown). Cytoplasmic and nuclear
fractions were normalized for total protein and separated on
a Western blot followed by immunodetection with the GNE
antibody (Fig. 1D). Densitometry analysis of the specific
immunoblot signals reveals nuclear versus cytoplasmic
GNE ratios ranging from 1:1.7 on day 1 and 1:2.3 on day 2.
                                                                          
The subcellular GNE localization in myogenic cells is
similar to HeLa cells
                                                                          
    To investigate the subcellular targeting of GNE in cells of
myogenic origin, TE671 cells, a rhabdomyosarcoma line and
fetal human myoblasts (FHM) were double labeled for GNE
and a Golgi marker and analyzed by confocal laser scanning
microscopy (Figs. 6A–F). Colocalization occurs in an
intensely stained juxtanuclear compartment typical of the
Golgi complex. Moreover, most of the nuclei are labeled by
the anti-GNE antibody (Figs. 6A, D) and display a similar
staining pattern like HeLa cells. After maturation of FHM
into differentiated, multinuclear myotubes, the Golgi appa-
ratus appears as a vesicular juxtanuclear structure (Figs. 6G–
I) that is less compact when compared to myoblasts (Figs.
6D–F). GNE is also present in a widespread nuclear staining
pattern in most of the myotubes (Figs. 6G, I).
                                                                          
Brefeldin A redistributes GNE in primary human myoblasts
and myotubes along with Golgi markers, whereas
Nocodazole displaces GNE and Golgi proteins
in myoblasts but not in myotubes
                                                                          
   To investigate the dynamic association of GNE with the
Golgi compartment and to elucidate GNE targeting changes
during myogenesis, primary human myoblasts and myo-
tubes were exposed to BFA and nocodazole. Double                         
labeling of GNE and the Golgi marker protein golgin-97     
reveals colocalization in myoblasts throughout the cyto-   
plasm subsequent to BFA-induced collapse of Golgi stacks   
appearing more vesiculated (Figs. 7A–C, compare to Fig.    
6). The nuclear localization of GNE persists in a widespread
nucleoplasmic pattern with some clustering in many small
and a few larger nuclear domains. Also, nocodazole
treatment has a dramatic effect on disturbing the Golgi        
morphology in myoblasts with extensive scattering of GNE          
along with Golgi-related vesicles as visualized by colocal-       
ization with golgin-97 (Figs. 7D–F). During recovery from         
nocodazole exposure, reformation of the Golgi complexes is        
in progress after 30 min as followed by the marker protein        
golgin-97. As expected, GNE colocalizes to the reforming          
Golgi-related compartment (Figs. 7G–I). BFA treatment of          
differentiated, multinuclear myotubes yields diffuse and          
vesiculated distribution of GNE along with golgin-97. By          
contrast, upon exposure to nocodazole, the Golgi morphol-         
ogy in myotubes remains largely unchanged (Figs. 7M–O)            
when compared to the untreated cells (Figs. 6G–I). GNE            
remains localized to the Golgi compartment surrounding the        
myonuclei or concentrating on opposite poles. Note that the       
Golgi architecture in myotubes is highly variable.                
                                                                  
                                                                  
Discussion                                                        
                                                                  
   The present report provides insight into the tissue            
distribution and the subcellular compartmentalization of          
mammalian GNE. So far, these studies were hampered by             
the lack of an appropriate antiserum to GNE. We now               
demonstrate tissue-specific regulation of GNE protein             
expression by Western blotting. Cerebrum, cerebellum,             
liver, skeletal muscle (quadriceps muscle), thymus, and
testis contain the highest amounts of GNE protein in mouse
at the expected molecular weight of about 79 kDa. More-
over, undifferentiated cells express high levels of GNE
protein in vitro consistent with published results of mRNA
expression [33,34]. In agreement with this finding, in
rodents, the highest levels of mRNA expression and
catalytic activity were found in liver, salivary glands, and
intestinal mucosa while in other organs less mRNA
expression is detected paralleled by lower total enzyme
activities [35].
    In accordance with its pivotal role in the sialic acid
biosynthesis pathway, it is conceivable that GNE is subject
to tight regulation with respect to transcription, translation
and multimeric assembly. Protein detection in several
tissues with lower or absent biochemical activities may
be explained through various mechanisms or factors: (i)
allosteric feedback inhibition by CMP-NeuAc, the acti-
vated end product of sialic acid biosynthesis, (ii) inactive
state, or (iii) higher sensitivity of protein detection by the
GNE antiserum. Since GNE mutations cause a primary
muscle disorder in human (HIBM), GNE protein expres-
sion in mammalian skeletal muscle is conceivable. Upon
immunoblotting, the GNE signal of mouse skeletal muscle
is much stronger as compared to human muscle. Possibly,      
there are age-, species-, or muscle type-specific differences 
in GNE expression. The significance of GNE double bands       
and differing apparent molecular weight of GNE in some        
organs remains to be determined. Posttranslational            
modifications could possibly account for differences in       
electrophoretic behavior as exemplified by in vitro           
phosphorylation of GNE [36]. Since GNE localizes in           
the cytosol, glycosylation is unlikely and was not            
confirmed by us (data not shown). Four different tissue-      
specific GNE mRNA-splice variants were suggested in           
human [37], corresponding to three GNE proteins with          
calculated molecular masses of the monomers of 79.2 kDa       
(variant I and IV), 82.5 kDa (variant II), and 74.6 kDa
(variant III).
   The GNE expression level is dependent on the differ-
entiation state of the cell as evidenced by strong GNE
Western blot signals in human embryonal cells and several
cancer cell lines. These findings are consistent with elevated
GNE mRNA levels found in early stages of mouse
embryogenesis [33] and in various malignant human cell
lines [34]. Also, most mouse tissues express low GNE
protein levels. Upregulation of GNE in rapidly dividing and
undifferentiated cells is consistent with the view that sialic
acids are a universal marker of growing and developing         
tissues [38]. Moreover the extent of cell surface sialylation      
has been correlated to the metastatic potential of malignant       
cells [39].                                                        
    GNE-specific immunolabeling of HeLa cells results in an        
intense staining of a polarized juxtanuclear compartment           
highly suggestive of the Golgi complex. Partial colocaliza-
tion of GNE with markers of the Golgi apparatus including
WGA, HPA, and golgin-97 is consistent with the view that
GNE is a resident protein of the Golgi compartment or tightly
associated to it. Our results suggest that GNE is not confined   
to cis-, intermediate-, or trans-Golgi but distributed through-       
out the entire Golgi compartment. Colocalization with                 
specific marker proteins or electron microscopy studies will          
be required for more precisely localizing GNE to Golgi                
subcompartments. Also, it remains to be determined whether            
GNE resides in the Golgi lumen or on the cytosolic side of            
Golgi membranes. Since any significant GNE signal overlap             
with the endoplasmic reticulum was lacking as visualized by           
the marker enzyme PDI (protein disulfide isomerase), we               
exclude persistent targeting of GNE to the ER.                        
    Since it is well established that mutations in GNE cause a        
rare inherited muscle disorder in humans called HIBM                  
(OMIM 603824), muscle cells are of special interest                   
regarding the subcellular distribution and regulation of              
GNE. We provide evidence that also human muscle cells,                
both differentiated and undifferentiated, reveal GNE local-           
ization to the Golgi. Consistent with previous detailed               
studies of Golgi complex reorganization during muscle                 
differentiation [40], the Golgi compartment appears less              
compact, loses its polarized localization and distributes in a        
more perinuclear fashion in myotubes.                                 
    Golgi-disturbing pharmacological agents have proven               
useful tools for gaining insight into basic mechanisms of             
organelle formation and maintenance in the secretory                  
pathway (for review, see Ref. [41]). As followed by the               
Golgi-resident marker protein golgin-97 and confocal                  
microscopy, partial Golgi association of the GNE immuno-              
fluorescence signal is maintained throughout drug treatment           
and during the recovery process, a behavior indicative of             
Golgi-resident proteins. Complete recovery was indicated              
by relocation of GNE together with Golgi markers to a                 
polarized intensely staining juxtanuclear structure likely to         
constitute the rebuilt Golgi complex. Importantly, the                
association of GNE with the Golgi compartment was further             
corroborated with (FLAG)3-tagged GNE recombinantly                    
expressed in HeLa cells.                                              
    The mechanism how GNE is targeted and retained in the             
Golgi compartment remains elusive. Golgi localization may             
involve disparate regions of a protein rather than a single           
discrete signal (for review, see Ref. [42]). For Golgi-resident       
glycosyl transferases two basic models have been proposed.            
(i) N-terminal signal sequence adjacent to the transmem-              
brane domain mediates Golgi-targeting. (ii) A subset of               
Golgi-resident proteins are recruited to the organelle by a           
process known as kin recognition that involves protein–               
protein interaction in the stem region of the protein (for            
review, see Ref. [43]). Hence, GNE targeting might depend             
on protein–protein interaction with other Golgi-resident              
proteins according to the kin recognition model mediating             
precise localization within the Golgi stacks. Alternatively,          
GNE might be anchored to Golgi membranes by covalently                
attached fatty acid chains like myristoyl or farnesyl. Finally,       
we cannot exclude the possibility of different GNE splice             
forms [37] mediating specific targeting to the cytoplasm or           
the nucleus. Mutational analysis will be needed to clarify            
this issue.                                                           
    Surprisingly, GNE was detected in the nucleus of HeLa
and muscle cells by confocal microscopy. The nuclear
localization of GNE was further corroborated by cell
fractionation and immunoblot analysis revealing regulation
of GNE protein expression in the nucleus as well as in the
cytoplasm. The nuclear staining pattern varied largely in
form and intensity among cells of the same type. These
findings may suggest cell cycle dependent regulation of
GNE targeting. This view is supported by the redistribution
behavior of GNE upon high-dose nocodazole treatment (30
AM) and recovery. In about half of the cells GNE is nearly
absent from the nucleus or present in lower levels than in the
other half of the cell population. Although the half life of
GNE in HeLa cells remains to be determined, the predom-
inant Golgi localization most likely results from redistrib-
ution involving nucleocytoplasmic shuttling rather than
protein de novo synthesis in the cytoplasm. In the trans-
fection experiment, (FLAG)3-tagged GNE was efficiently
targeted to the Golgi complex as well as the nucleus.
However, recombinant GNE was found in the nucleus at
lower levels than wild type GNE in HeLa. There are several
explanations why recombinant GNE is less abundant in the
nucleus of transfected cells when compared to wild type
GNE. (i) Overexpression of GNE under a constitutively
active CMV promoter may alter the balance between the
cytoplasmic and nuclear GNE pool. (ii) The N-terminal
(FLAG)3-tag might interfere with nucleocytoplasmic shut-
tling. (iii) Alternative splicing may give rise to variant GNE
isoforms as previously suggested [37]. The transfected GNE
construct represents only splice variant IV that might have a
restricted subcellular distribution. Since the polyclonal GNE
antibody was raised against an amino acid sequence in the
C-terminal part of GNE within the kinase domain, all
isoforms are recognized by the antibody.
    Immunolocalization of wild type GNE consistently
resulted in a prominent nuclear signal in the majority of
cells. However, nuclear GNE staining was variable indicat-
ing differential regulation. We hypothesized that GNE might
be a nucleocytoplasmic shuttling protein. A key feature of
nucleocytoplasmic shuttling is the recognition of specific
signals present in the substrate proteins. Although there are
several candidate regions consisting of small basic amino
acid clusters, no classical monopartite or bipartite nuclear
localization signal (NLS) can be pinpointed in GNE [27].
However, protein export from the nucleus is often mediated
by a leucine-rich nuclear export signal (NES). Visual
inspection of the amino acid sequence identified a putative
leucine-rich NES in agreement with the widely accepted
consensus L-x(2,3)-[LIVFM]-x(2,3)-L-x-[LI] [44] suggest-
ing that GNE might be a nucleocytoplasmic shuttling
protein. Experimental evaluation is needed to support this
hypothesis. The NES is highly conserved in GNE of human,
mouse, rat, hamster and zebrafish (Fig. 8).
    Several reasons are conceivable for nucleocytoplasmic
shuttling of GNE. (i) Sialylation is considered the final step
in the glycosylation of N- and O-linked oligosaccharides                
Fig. 8. Putative nuclear export signal in GNE. Sequence alignment of GNE      
homologues indicates a highly conserved putative leucine-rich nuclear
export signal (NES) in amino acids 121–140 in accordance to the widely
                                                                              
accepted consensus L-x(2,3)-[LIVFM]-x(2,3)-L-x-[LI]. The residues com-        
prising the putative NES are shaded in red. (For interpretation of the        
references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web 
version of this article.)                                                     
                                                                              
and is believed to occur either in the trans-cisternae or the                 
trans-Golgi network [45]. Our data presented here suggest                     
GNE localization in the Golgi compartment. Moreover,                          
sialic acids are taken up as activated nucleotide donors,
concentrated by specific transporters and consumed by
specific glycosyltransferases during addition to glycoconju-                  
gate acceptors in the Golgi.
    (ii) The substrate required for the addition of sialic acid               
to the terminal sugar residues of glycoproteins or ganglio-                   
sides is provided by CMP-Neu5Ac synthetase that catalyzes                     
the activation of Neu5Ac to CMP-Neu5Ac. For unknown                           
reasons, this particular step takes place in the nucleus where                
also CMP-Neu5Ac synthetase was detected [18,19]. It is                        
possible that GNE might travel to the nucleus to activate                     
sialic acid biosynthesis within a large multi-enzyme com-                     
plex containing the required machinery including CMP-                         
Neu5Ac synthetase.                                                            
    (iii) High levels of CMP-Neu5Ac, the final product of the                 
sialic acid biosynthetic pathway allosterically regulate GNE                  
by feedback inhibition [46,15]. Localization of GNE at the                    
site of CMP-Neu5Ac consumption might relieve feedback                         
inhibition thereby initiating sialic acid biosynthesis if the                 
CMP-Neu5Ac concentration is low.                                              
    Compartmentalization of the cellular GNE pool might                       
provide additional possibilities to regulate the enzyme’s                     
catalytic activities. Homology search of databases revealed                   
significant homology of a series of bacterial xylose operon                   
repressor proteins and ROK family transcriptional activators
to the kinase domain of GNE [47]. It was speculated that the
bicistronic vertebrate GNE gene evolved from two separate
                                                                              
bacterial ancestor genes, an epimerase and a kinase activity.
From an evolutionary point of view, GNE might play a role                     
in modulating gene expression when targeted to the nucleus.                   
The subnuclear staining pattern of GNE features widespread                    
nucleoplasmic staining in addition to signal accumulation in                  
a few large round shaped subnuclear domains. Colocaliza-                      
   Immunofluorescence microscopy showing a static steady
state snapshot of the cell, might fail to reveal transient
subcellular localization of GNE. It remains to be determined
whether allosteric end product inhibition of GNE regulates
directional trafficking of the protein in addition to enzyma
activity. Our results suggest a dynamic localization with
GNE moving in a temporal sequence between several
subcellular compartments before adopting a steady state.
The putative cycling behavior of GNE underlines the
importance of measuring the dynamic properties of the
protein in further detail when interpreting both GNE
                                                            
                                                            
localization pattern and its possible functional implication
In vivo labeling of GNE by GFP fusion may allow to
measure dynamic parameters directly and to dissect func-
tional domains essential for precise subcellular targeting.
Finally, elucidating how GNE targeting and function are
dynamically linked may help to develop a model of how
sialic acid biosynthesis is regulated and promote our
understanding of the pathogenesis of human GNE-related
disorders.                                                 



















                                              S. Krause et al. / Experimental Cell Research 304 (2005) 365–379                                                373
























































































































374                                         S. Krause et al. / Experimental Cell Research 304 (2005) 365–379








                                             S. Krause et al. / Experimental Cell Research 304 (2005) 365–379                                        377


                                                                                   Immunofluorescence microscopy showing a static steady
                                                                                state snapshot of the cell, might fail to reveal transient
                                                                                subcellular localization of GNE. It remains to be determined
                                                                                whether allosteric end product inhibition of GNE regulates
                                                                                directional trafficking of the protein in addition to enzymatic
                                                                                activity. Our results suggest a dynamic localization with
                                                                                GNE moving in a temporal sequence between several
                                                                                subcellular compartments before adopting a steady state.
                                                                                The putative cycling behavior of GNE underlines the
                                                                                importance of measuring the dynamic properties of the
Fig. 8. Putative nuclear export signal in GNE. Sequence alignment of GNE        protein in further detail when interpreting both GNE
homologues indicates a highly conserved putative leucine-rich nuclear
export signal (NES) in amino acids 121–140 in accordance to the widely
                                                                                localization pattern and its possible functional implications.
accepted consensus L-x(2,3)-[LIVFM]-x(2,3)-L-x-[LI]. The residues com-          In vivo labeling of GNE by GFP fusion may allow to
prising the putative NES are shaded in red. (For interpretation of the          measure dynamic parameters directly and to dissect func-
references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web   tional domains essential for precise subcellular targeting.
version of this article.)                                                       Finally, elucidating how GNE targeting and function are
                                                                                dynamically linked may help to develop a model of how
and is believed to occur either in the trans-cisternae or the                   sialic acid biosynthesis is regulated and promote our
trans-Golgi network [45]. Our data presented here suggest                       understanding of the pathogenesis of human GNE-related
GNE localization in the Golgi compartment. Moreover,                            disorders.                                                 
sialic acids are taken up as activated nucleotide donors,
concentrated by specific transporters and consumed by
specific glycosyltransferases during addition to glycoconju-                    Acknowledgments
gate acceptors in the Golgi.
    (ii) The substrate required for the addition of sialic acid                    We are grateful to Eva Schmidtmayer and Eva Wiens for
to the terminal sugar residues of glycoproteins or ganglio-                     expert technical assistance. Human myoblast cultures were
sides is provided by CMP-Neu5Ac synthetase that catalyzes                       obtained from the Muscle Tissue Culture Collection at the
the activation of Neu5Ac to CMP-Neu5Ac. For unknown                             Friedrich-Baur-Institute (Department of Neurology, Ludwig-
reasons, this particular step takes place in the nucleus where                  Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany). The Muscle
also CMP-Neu5Ac synthetase was detected [18,19]. It is                          Tissue Culture Collection is part of the German network on
possible that GNE might travel to the nucleus to activate                       muscular dystrophies (MD-NET, service structure S1,
sialic acid biosynthesis within a large multi-enzyme com-                       01GM0302) funded by the German ministry of education
plex containing the required machinery including CMP-                           and research (BMBF, Bonn, Germany). The Muscle Tissue
Neu5Ac synthetase.                                                              Culture Collection is a partner of Eurobiobank (Eurordis;
    (iii) High levels of CMP-Neu5Ac, the final product of the                   scientific coordinator: C. Jaeger, Paris, France) funded by the
sialic acid biosynthetic pathway allosterically regulate GNE                    EC within the 5th framework (QLRT-2001-02769). SK
by feedback inhibition [46,15]. Localization of GNE at the                      receives a scholarship from The Myositis Association
site of CMP-Neu5Ac consumption might relieve feedback                           (Harrisonburg, VA, U.S.A.). This work was supported in
inhibition thereby initiating sialic acid biosynthesis if the                   part by grants from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft,
CMP-Neu5Ac concentration is low.                                                Bonn, Germany to H.L. and R.H., from the Fritz-Thyssen-
    Compartmentalization of the cellular GNE pool might                         Stiftung, Kfln, Germany and the German-Israeli Foundation
provide additional possibilities to regulate the enzyme’s                       for Scientific Research and Development, Jerusalem, Israel to
catalytic activities. Homology search of databases revealed                     S.H., Z.A. and S. M.-R. and the Sonnenfeld-Stiftung, Berlin,
significant homology of a series of bacterial xylose operon                     Germany, to S.H. and R.H.
repressor proteins and ROK family transcriptional activators
to the kinase domain of GNE [47]. It was speculated that the
bicistronic vertebrate GNE gene evolved from two separate
                                                                                References
bacterial ancestor genes, an epimerase and a kinase activity.
From an evolutionary point of view, GNE might play a role                        [1] S. Rens-Domiano, T. Reisine, Structural analysis and functional role
in modulating gene expression when targeted to the nucleus.                          of the carbohydrate component of somatostatin receptors, J. Biol.
The subnuclear staining pattern of GNE features widespread                           Chem. 266 (1991) 20094 – 20102.                             
nucleoplasmic staining in addition to signal accumulation in                     [2] G.M. Edelman, K.L. Crossin, Cell adhesion molecules: implications
a few large round shaped subnuclear domains. Colocaliza-                             for a molecular histology, Annu. Rev. Biochem. 60 (1991) 155 – 190.
                                                                                 [3] A. Varki, Sialic acids as ligands in recognition phenomena, FASEB J.
tion experiments with established nuclear proteins might                             11 (1997) 248 – 255.                                        
help to identify GNE interacting partners thereby pointing to                    [4] S. Kelm, R. Schauer, Sialic acids in molecular and cellular
yet unknown roles of the enzyme in the nuclear metabolism.                           interactions, Int. Rev. Cytol. 175 (1997) 137 – 240.
378                                         S. Krause et al. / Experimental Cell Research 304 (2005) 365–379


 [5] P.R. Crocker, Siglecs: sialic acid binding immunoglobulin-like lectins    [24] H. Lochmqller, T. Johns, E.A. Shoubridge, Expression of the E6 and
     in cell–cell interactions and signalling, Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 12         E7 genes of human papillomavirus (HPV16) extends the life span of
     (2002) 609 – 615.                                                              human myoblasts, Exp. Cell Res. 248 (1999) 186 – 193.
 [6] D. Vestweber, J.E. Blanks, Mechanisms that regulate the function of       [25] P.K. Smith, R.I. Krohn, G.T. Hermanson, A.K. Mallia, F.H. Gartner,
     the selectins and their ligands, Physiol. Rev. 9 (1999) 181 – 213.             M.D. Provenzano, E.K. Fujimoto, N.M. Goeke, B.J. Olson, D.C.
 [7] D. Vestweber, Lymphocyte trafficking through blood and lymphatic               Klenk, Measurement of protein using bicinchoninic acid, Anal.
     vessels: more than just selectins, chemokins and integrins, Eur. J.            Biochem. 150 (1985) 76 – 85.
     Immunol. 33 (2003) 1362 – 1365.                                           [26] B.P. Zhou, Y. Liao, W. Xia, B. Spohn, M.H. Lee, M.C. Hung,
 [8] D.A. Alexander, K. Dimock, Sialic acid functions in enterovirus 70             Cytoplasmic localization of p21Cip1/WAF1 by Akt-induced phos-
     binding and infection, J. Virol. 76 (2002) 11265 – 11272.                      phorylation in HER-2/neu-overexpressing cells, Nat. Cell Biol. 3
 [9] M. Matrosovich, H.D. Klenk, Natural and synthetic sialic acid-                 (2001) 245 – 252.
     containing inhibitors of influenza virus receptor binding, Rev. Med.      [27] M. Cokol, R. Nair, B. Rost, Finding nuclear localization signals,
     Virol. 13 (2003) 85 – 97.                                                      EMBO Rep. 1 (2000) 411 – 415.
[10] H.H. Tong, X. Liu, Y. Chen, M. James, T. Demaria, Effect of               [28] S. Hammarstrom, L.A. Murphy, I.J. Goldstein, M.E. Etzler, Carbohy-
     neuraminidase on receptor-mediated adherence of Streptococcus                  drate binding specificity of four N-acetyl-D-galactosamine-bspecificQ
     pneumoniae to chinchilla tracheal epithelium, Acta Oto-Laryngol.               lectins: Helix pomatia A hemagglutinin, soy bean agglutinin, lima
     122 (2002) 413 – 419.                                                          bean lectin, and Dolichos biflorus lectin, Biochemistry 16 (1977)
[11] J.W. Dennis, S. Laferte, Recognition of asparagine-linked oligosac-            2750 – 2755.
     charides on murine tumor cells by natural killer cells, Cancer Res. 45    [29] H. Debray, D. Decout, G. Strecker, G. Spik, J. Montreuil,
     (1985) 6034 – 6040.                                                            Specificity of twelve lectins towards oligosaccharides and glyco-
[12] R. Sawada, S. Tsuboi, M. Fukuda, Differential E-selectin-dependent             peptides related to N-glycosylproteins, Eur. J. Biochem. 117 (1981)
     adhesion efficiency in sublines of a human colon cancer exhibiting             41 – 55.
     distinct metastatic potentials, J. Biol. Chem. 269 (1994) 1425 – 1431.    [30] K.J. Griffith, E.K. Chan, C.C. Lung, J.C. Hamel, X. Guo, K. Miyachi,
[13] M. Schwarzkopf, K.P. Knobeloch, E. Rohde, S. Hinderlich, N.                    M.J. Fritzler, Molecular cloning of a novel 97-kD Golgi complex
     Wiechens, L. Lucka, I. Horak, W. Reutter, R. Horstkorte, Sialylation           autoantigen associated with Sjfgren’s syndrome, Arthritis Rheum. 40
     is essential for early development in mice, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.             (1997) 1693 – 1702.
     U. S. A. 99 (2002) 5267 – 5270.                                           [31] F.A. Barr, A novel Rab6-interacting domain defines a family of Golgi-
[14] W. Reutter, R. St7sche, P. Stehling, O. Baum, The biology of sialic            targeted coiled-coil proteins, Curr. Biol. 9 (1999) 381 – 384.
     acids: insight into their structure, metabolism and function in           [32] D.M. Ferrari, H.D. Sfling, The protein disulphide-isomerase family:
     particular during viral infection, in: H.-J. Gabius, S. Gabius (Eds.),         unravelling a string of folds, Biochem. J. 339 (1999) 1 – 10.
     Glycosciences, Status and Perspectives, Chapman & Hall, Weinheim,         [33] R. Horstkorte, S. Nfhring, N. Wiechens, M. Schwarzkopf, K.
     Germany, pp. 245–259.                                                          Danker, W. Reutter, L. Lucka, Tissue expression and amino
[15] S. Hinderlich, R. St7sche, R. Zeitler, W. Reutter, A bifunctional              acid sequence of murine UDP-N-acetylglucosamine-2-epimerase/
     enzyme catalyzes the first two steps in N-acetylneuraminic acid                N-acetylmannosamine kinase, Eur. J. Biochem. 260 (1999)
     biosynthesis of rat liver, Purification and characterization of UDP-N-         923 – 927.
     acetylglucosamine 2-epimerase/N-acetylmannosamine kinase, J. Biol.        [34] L. Lucka, M. Krause, K. Danker, W. Reutter, R. Horstkorte, Primary
     Chem. 272 (1997) 24313 – 24318.                                                structure and expression analysis of human UDP-N-acetylglucos-
[16] O.T. Keppler, S. Hinderlich, J. Langner, R. Schwartz-Albiez, W.                amine-2-epimerase/N-acetylmannosamine kinase, the bifunctional
     Reutter, M. Pawlita, UDP-GlcNAc 2-epimerase: a regulator of cell               enzyme in neuraminic acid biosynthesis, FEBS Lett. 454 (1999)
     surface sialylation, Science 284 (1999) 1372 – 1376.                           341 – 344.
[17] E.L. Kean, S. Roseman, The sialic acids: X. Purification and              [35] R. St7sche, S. Hinderlich, C. Weise, K. Effertz, L. Lucka, P.
     properties of cytidine 5V-monophosphosialic acid synthetase, J. Biol.          Moormann, W. Reutter, A bifunctional enzyme catalyzes the first
     Chem. 241 (1966) 5643 – 5650.                                                  two steps in N-acetylneuraminic acid biosynthesis of rat liver.
[18] A.K. Mqnster, M. Eckhardt, B. Potvin, M. Mqhlenhoff, P. Stanley, R.            Molecular cloning and functional expression of UDP-N-acetyl-
     Gerardy-Schahn, Mammalian cytidine 5V-monophosphate N-acetyl-                  glucosamine 2-epimerase/N-acetylmannosamine kinase, J. Biol.
     neuraminic acid synthetase: a nuclear protein with evolutionarily              Chem. 272 (1997) 24319 – 24324.
     conserved structural motifs, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 95 (1998)    [36] R. Horstkorte, S. Nfhring, K. Danker, K. Effertz, W. Reutter, L.
     9140 – 9145.                                                                   Lucka, Protein kinase C phosphorylates and regulates murine UDP-N-
[19] A.K. Mqnster, B. Weinhold, B. Gotza, M. Mqhlenhoff, M. Frosch,                 acetylglucosamine-2-epimerase/N-acetylmannosamine kinase, FEBS
     R. Gerardy-Schahn, Nuclear localization signal of murine CMP-                  Lett. 470 (2000) 315 – 318.
     Neu5Ac synthetase includes residues required for both nuclear             [37] G.D.J. Watts, M. Thorne, M.J. Kovach, A. Pestronk, V.A. Kimonis,
     targeting and enzymatic activity, J. Biol. Chem. 277 (2002)                    Clinical and genetic heterogeneity in chromosome 9p associated
     19688 – 19696.                                                                 hereditary inclusion body myopathy: exclusion of GNE and three
[20] H. Fried, U. Kutay, Nucleocytoplasmic transport: taking an inventory,          other candidate genes, Neuromuscular Disord. 13 (2003) 559 – 567.
     Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 60 (2003) 1659 – 1688.                               [38] G. Kohla, E. Stockfleth, R. Schauer, Gangliosides with O-acetylated
[21] U. Fischer, J. Huber, W.C. Boelens, I.W. Mattaj, R. Lqhrmann, The              sialic acids in tumors of neuroectodermal origin, Neurochem. Res. 27
     HIV-1 Rev activation domain is a nuclear export signal that accesses           (2002) 583 – 592.
     an export pathway used by specific cellular RNAs, Cell 82 (1995)          [39] E. Gorelik, U. Galili, A. Raz, On the role of cell surface carbohydrates
     745 – 783.                                                                     and their binding proteins (lectins) in tumor metastasis, Cancer
[22] W. Wen, J.L. Meinkoth, R.Y. Tsien, S.S. Taylor, Identification of a            Metastasis Rev. 20 (2001) 245 – 277.
     signal for rapid export of proteins from the nucleus, Cell 82 (1995)      [40] Z. Lu, D. Joseph, E. Bugnard, K.J. Zaal, E. Ralston, Golgi complex
     463 – 473.                                                                     reorganization during muscle differentiation: visualization in living
[23] A. Blume, D. Ghaderi, V. Liebig, S. Hinderlich, P. Donner, W.                  cells and mechanism, Mol. Biol. Cell 12 (2001) 795 – 808.
     Reutter, L. Lucka, UDP-N-acetylglucosamine 2-epimerase/N-acetyl-          [41] A. Dinter, E.G. Berger, Golgi-disturbing agents, Histochem. Cell Biol.
     mannosamine kinase, functionally expressed in and purified from                109 (1998) 571 – 590.
     E. coli, yeast and insect cells, Protein Expr. Purif. 35 (2004)           [42] A.S. Opat, C. van Vliet, P.A. Gleeson, Trafficking and localisation of
     387 – 396.                                                                     resident Golgi glycosylation enzymes, Biochimie 83 (2001) 763 – 773.
                                            S. Krause et al. / Experimental Cell Research 304 (2005) 365–379                                        379


[43] K.J. Colley, Golgi localization of glycosyl transferases: more            [46] K. Kikuchi, S. Tsuiki, Purification and properties of UDP-N-
     questions than answers, Glycobiology 7 (1997) 1 – 13.                          acetylglucosamine 2V-epimerase from rat liver, Biochim. Biophys.
[44] T. la Cour, R. Gupta, K. Rapacki, K. Skriver, F.M. Poulsen, S. Brunak,         Acta 327 (1973) 193 – 206.
     NESbase version 1.0: a database of nuclear export signals, Nucleic        [47] K. Effertz, S. Hinderlich, W. Reutter, Selective loss of either the
     Acids Res. 31 (2003) 393 – 396.                                                epimerase or kinase activity of UDP-N-acetylglucosamine 2-epimerase/
[45] S. Pfeffer, Membrane domains in the secretory and endocytic                    N-acetylmannosamine kinase due to site-directed mutagenesis based on
     pathways, Cell 21 (2003) 507 – 517.                                            sequence alignments, J. Biol. Chem. 274 (1999) 28771 – 28778.

