THEJOURNAL
OF BIOLOGICAL
CHEMISTRY
0 1991 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

Vol. 266, No. 30,Issue of October 25, pp. 20094-20102,1991
Printed in U.S. A .

Structural Analysis and Functional Roleof the Carbohydrate
Component of Somatostatin Receptors*
(Received for publication, May 6, 1991)

Stephanie Rens-DomianoS and TerryReisine
From the Departmentof Pharmacology, Uniuersity of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania19104

SRIF receptors are membrane-bound glycoproteins. gests that the desialylated SRIF receptor is functionTo structurally identify the carbohydrate
components ally active and remains coupled to GTP-binding proof SRIF receptors, solubilized
rat brain SRIF receptorsteins,butexhibits
a reducedaffinityfor
agonists.
were subjected to lectin affinity chromatography.
Sol- Treatment of AtT-20 cell membranes with neuraminubilized SRIF receptors specifically bound to wheat idase from V . cholera was also able to greatly reduce
germ agglutinin-lectin affinitycolumns but not to suc- the affinity of SRIF receptors for[12'I]MK 678. Howcinylated wheat germ agglutinin. This finding,
as well ever, treatmentof AtT-20 cell membranes with neuras the ability of the solubilized receptor to interact
aminidase in the presence of MK 678 diminished the
with a Sambucus nigra L. lectin affinity column sug- ability of the neuraminidase to affect [1261]MK678
gested that sialic acid residues
are associated with
binding to SRIF receptors. The protection afforded the
SRIF receptors. The inability
of the receptor to bind to
agonist occupied SRIF receptors to the effects
of neurconcanavalin A, Dolichus biflorus agglutinin, Ulex eu- aminidase treatment suggests that the sialic acid
resiropeaue I, and Jacalin lectin affinity
columns suggests dues involved in maintaining the receptor in
a high
that high mannose, N-acetylgalactosamine, fucose,
and affinity state for agonist are closely associated with
0-linked carbohydratesare not associated with recep- the ligand-binding site. The results of these studies
tor. To investigate the functional role of the carbohy- demonstrate for the first time that sialic acid residues,
drate groups in brain SRIF receptors, specific sugars as well as certainothercarbohydrate
components,
were selectively cleaved from SRIF receptors and the maintain the SRIF receptor ainhigh affinity state for
subsequent effect on the specific high affinity binding agonists and therefore may have an important physof the agonist ['261]MK 678 to SRIF receptors was
iological role in the functional activity
of SRIF recepdetermined. Treatment of the receptor with endogly- tors.
cosidase D did not affect the specific binding of [lzsI]
MK 678 to the solubilized SRIF receptors, consistent
with the finding from lectin affinity chromatography
that high mannose-type carbohydrate structures were
SRIF' is a cyclic tetradecapeptide found throughout the
not associated with SRIF receptors. Treatmentof sol- central and peripheral nervous systems, as well as in the
ubilized SRIF receptors withpeptide-N-glycosidase F pancreas and gastrointestinal system(1).In the central nervand endoglycosidases H and F reduced ['2SI]MK 678 ous system,SRIFactsas
a neurotransmitterto regulate
binding to SRIF receptors indicating that either hyneuronal activity (2) and to facilitaterelease of other neurobrid, ora combination of hybrid andcomplex N-linked
transmitters such as dopamine, norepinephrine, and serotonin
carbohydrate structures, have a role in maintaining
the receptor ina high affinity state for
agonists. Treat- (3). Additionally, SRIF has a role in centrally mediated behaviors suchas movement andcognition (1,4). In the periphment of solubilized SRIF receptors with neuraminidase
ery, SRIF is the predominant
physiological inhibitor of growth
from Vibrio cholera abolishedhigh affinity agonist
(5) and it
binding to the receptors, whereas treatment
of the hormone release from cells in the anterior pituitary
receptor with neuraminidase from Newcastle disease blocks the secretion of both insulin and glucagon from the
virus didnot affect ['261]MK 678 binding to the recep- pancreas (6, 7).
tor. These findings suggestthat sialic acid residuesin
SRIF induces itsbiological effects by stimulating cell sura n a2,6-configuration have a role in maintaining the face receptors. Characterization of the physical properties of
SRIF receptor ina high affinity conformation forag- brain, pituitary, and pancreatic SRIF receptors by chemical
onists. This is further indicated by studies on SRIF
or photocross-linking techniques have shown the size of the
receptorsinthepituitarytumor
cell line, AtT-PO. receptors to vary from 60 to 94 kDa (8-13). Thermos et al.
Treatment of AtT-20 cells in culture with neuramini- (13) have additionally reported that the high affinity SRIF
dase ( V . cholera) greatly reduces high affinity [12sI] analogue [lZ5I]CGP23996 could specifically label two recepMK 678 binding sites, but did not alter the maximal tors in the rat corpus striatum were
thatof the samemolecular
ability of SRIF to inhibit forskolin-stimulated CAMP
accumulation in intact AtT-20cells. This finding sug- weight, but differentphysical charge. Purified SRIF receptors
from brain (14) and a gastric tumor cell line (15) were also
* This work was supported by National Institute of Mental Health shown to be of different sizes, 60 and 90 kDa, respectively.
Grant MH 45533, National Institute of MentalHealthTraining
Grant 34781, and National Research Service Award Post-doctoral
Fellowship NS 09002. The costs of publication of this article were
defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. This article must
therefore be hereby marked "advertisement" in accordance with 18
U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
$ To whom correspondence should be addressed.

The abbreviations used are: SRIF, somatotrophrelease inhibitory
factor; WGA, wheat germ agglutinin; ConA, concanavalin A; CHAPS,
3-[(cholamidopropyl)dimethylammonio]-l-propanesulfonate;
Endo
F, endoglycosidase F; Endo H, enoglycosidase H; Endo D, endoglycosidase D; PNGase F, peptide-N-glycosidase F; EGTA, [ethylenebis(oxyethylenenitrilo)]tetraaceticacid.

20094

Carbohydrate
Analysis

of Somatostatin Receptors

20095

These results would suggest that physical heterogeneities exist of hybrid and complex, oligosaccharide structures and that
particular carbohydrate groups, specifically sialic acid resibetween SRIF receptors.
Post-translational modifications have been shown to con- dues, play a critical role in the binding of agonists to SRIF
tribute to the
heterogeneity of neurotransmitter and hormone receptors. The SRIF receptors are the first neurotransmitter
receptors (16-20). Ina similar manner,post-translational
receptors for which carbohydrate groups play a fundamental
modifications of SRIF receptors may contribute to the ob- role in the functional activity of the receptors.
served physical heterogeneity described above. In thisregard,
EXPERIMENTALPROCEDURES
a number of investigators have reported that SRIF receptors
from brain, pituitary, and pancreas areglycoproteins. ThereMaterials
fore, it is conceivable that differences in carbohydrate procAgarose-bound
lectins
were
obtained fromVector Laboratories
essing may contribute to the physical heterogeneity of SRIF
(Burlingame,
CA).
Purified
Vibrio
cholera neuraminidase was purreceptors. Previous studies have shown that SRIF receptors,
affinity labeled with radioactive SRIF analogues, from brain, chased from Behring Diagnostics, a-Fucosidase from Oxford Glycosystems (Rosedale, NY), and all other glycosidases from Boehringer
pituitary,and pancreatic membranes areall able to bind Mannheim Biochemicals. CHAPS and bicinchoninicacid protein
specifically to WGA lectin affinity columns (9, 13, 21-25), assay reagentswere purchased from PierceChemical Co. a n d ~ - T r p ' which the authors have suggested implies the presence of SRIF from Bachem (Torrence, CA). Newcastle disease virus was a
GlcNAc in the carbohydrate structure. Additionally, it has gift from Dr. Robert Eckroade, University
of Pennsylvania Veterinary
also been reported that SRIF receptors from pituitary and School.
cerebrocortical membranes can specifically bind to Ricinus
Solubilization of the SRIFReceptor
communis I1 lectin affinity columns, but not to ConA or lectil
The solubilization of ratbrainSRIFreceptors
was performed
lectin columns (10, 21). However, to date, there has been no
complete nor detailed analysis of the carbohydrate nature of essentially as described by He et al. (25). Briefly, rat brains, minus
SRIF receptors. Analysis of the carbohydrate composition of cerebellum, were homogenized in 10 volumes of 50 mM Tris, pH 7.8,
SRIF receptors is therefore necessary to establish whether containing 1 mM EGTA, 5 mM MgClz, 10 pg/ml of leupeptin, 2 pg/
ml of pepstatin, 200 pg/ml of bacitracin, and 50 mM phenylmethylphysical heterogeneities of SRIF receptor subtypes are due to sulfonyl fluoride (Buffer 1).The homogenate was centrifuged a t 600
differences in carbohydrate processing.
X g for 5 min and the supernatantsaved. The pellet was resuspended
Differences in the physical properties of SRIF receptors in 5 volumes of Buffer 1 and recentrifuged a t 600 X g for 5 min. The
may also contribute to functional heterogeneity of the recep- two supernatants were combined andcentrifuged a t 45,000 X g for 30
tors. Brain SRIF receptors have been reported to couple to min. The resultingpellet was then resuspended in Buffer 1 and
multiple cellular effector systems, including adenylylcyclase centrifuged again a t 45,000 X g for 30 min. The resulting membrane
(8) and ionic conductance channels (27-30). Results from a pellet was solubilized by resuspension in Buffer 1 containing 10 mM
number of studies suggest that brain SRIF receptors couple CHAPS and 20% glycerol, stirred on ice for 45 min, and centrifuged
to these effector systems via pertussis toxin-sensitive GTP- at 150,000 X g for 60 min. The supernatant was removed, diluted
with Buffer 1, and used for radioligand binding studies of solubilized
binding proteins (26-30). Functionally distinct SRIF recep- SRIF receptors. Protein content
was determined by the bicinchoninic
tors have been shown to be expressed in pancreatic islet cells acid protein assay method (33) using bovine serum albumin as the
(6, 7, 31) and neocortical neurons (29, 30). In the pancreas, protein standard.
SRIF and its prohormone SRIF-28 have different rank order
['"IIMK 678 Binding Assay to Solubilized SRIF Receptors
of potencies to inhibit glucagon versus insulin release (6, 7,
32), and, in neocortical neurons, they have opposing effects
Solubilized SRIF receptors were reversibly labeled with the stable
ona delayed rectifier K' current (29, 30). Variations in high affinity agonist, [lZ51]MK678, as described previously by He et
carbohydrate processing could be an underlying factor in the al. (25). Specific [L251]MK 678binding was defined as total ['"I]MK
different pharmacological properties of SRIF receptor sub- 678 binding to solubilized SRIF receptors minus the amount bound
.
['2sI]MK 678 binding
types. In this regard, the carbohydrate component of SRIF in the presence of 1 p~ D - T ~ ~ ' - S R I FSpecific
receptors may have roles in determining ligand binding affin- accounted for 60-70% of total binding tosolubilized SRIF receptors.
ities and/or promoting the coupling of SRIF receptors to
Lectin Affinity Chromatography
particular populations of GTP-binding proteins and specific
Agarose-bound lectin columns (1ml bed volume) were equilibrated
cellular effector systems.
with 50 mM Tris, p H 7.8, containing 5 mM CHAPS and10% glycerol.
To investigate the carbohydrate natureof brain SRIF recep- When appropriate, 1 mM CaCI2 and MgCL were added to theequilitors and the role of oligosaccharides in the functional activity bration buffer and the proteins tobe chromatographed solubilized in
of SRIF receptors, we have developed a method to solubilize the absenceof EGTA. All column procedures were conducted a t 4 "C,
SRIF receptors in an active form (25). The solubilized recep- except ConA chromatography, which was performed at room temper5 mM
tors from brain retain their high affinity and specificity for ature. A 1-mlsample of solubilized brainmembranes,in
allowed to
SRIF agonists and remain coupled to GTP-binding proteins. CHAPS, was applied to the agarose-bound lectin and
Because the solubilized receptor can be solubilized in a high equilibrate overnight. The columns were then washed with 20 ml of
equilibration buffer and 2-ml fractions were collected. The columns
affinity state, it is possible to investigate the influence of were then specifically eluted with 15 ml of equilibration buffer concarbohydrates in SRIF receptors on agonist interaction with taining the appropriate sugar and 1-ml fractionswere collected. All
SRIF receptors. This provides a distinct advantage over past fractions were then assayed for specific [lZ51]MK678 binding. The
attempts to characterize the oligosaccharide composition of sugars used to elute the
glycoprotein from the lectin affinity columns
SRIF receptors after covalent cross-linking of the receptor were not observed to have any effect on the specific binding of ['"I]
with a radioactive ligand. These past studies were unable to MK 678 tosolubilized SRIF receptors. All of the lectin columnswere
investigate the role of carbohydrates in high affinity agonist tested with ovalbumin,cul-acid glycoprotein, desialylated cu,-acid glybinding to SRIF receptors, nor in the functional activity of coprotein, or ribonuclease b to determine that the chromatographic
conditions allowed for the selective and quantitative binding of the
SRIF receptors. In the present study, we have investigated appropriatetypes of glycoproteins. CHAPS was not observed to
the functional role of the carbohydrate moiety of solubilized interfere with the lectin affinity chromatography, except for ConA,
high affinity SRIF receptors. These studiesshow, for the first which was circumvented by conducting those studies a t room temtime, that SRIF receptors contain hybrid, or a combination perature instead of 4 "C.

Carbohydrate
Analysis

20096

of Somatostatin Receptors

For treatments with &galactosidase (D. pneumonia) (0.1 unit/ml),
solubilized membranes were prepared in the absence of EGTA and
enzymatic treatments were also conducted in the absence of EGTA.
0-Galactosidase and 0-N-acetyl-D-glucosaminidasewere able to completely remove Gal and GlcNac from desialylated- and desialylateddegalactosylated al-acid glycoprotein, respectively (Fig. 1).
Neuraminidase Treatment-Neuraminidase from V. cholera was
used at a concentration of 0.17 unit/ml. Newcastle disease virus was
prepared as described by Paulson et al. (34) and had a neuraminidase
content of0.20 unit/ml and a specific activity of0.37 unit/mg of
protein as determined by the thiobarbituric assay method of Warren
(35). One unit of Newcastle disease virus neuraminidase activitywas
equal to 1 @molof product/min. Newcastle disease virus neuraminidase was used at a concentration of 0.08 unit/ml. Under the assay
conditions employed, neuraminidase from V. cholera was able to
completely desialylate al-acid glycoprotein as shown in Fig. 1. a1Acid glycoprotein contains approximately 50% a2,3-linked sialic acids
(34) and, accordingly, Newcastle disease virusneuraminidase was
only able to remove about 50% of the sialic acid residues from a]acid glycoprotein as demonstrated in Fig. 1. These results are in
agreement with previously published results on the types of sialic
acid linkages present on al-acid glycoprotein and its ability to be
desialylated by these two types of neuraminidases (34).
NeuraminidaseTreatment of AtT-20 Cells-AtT-20 cells were
grown and subcultured as previously described (14). Cells were plated
in six-well culture plates at aninitial density of 1 X lo6 cells/well and
used in the experiments 3-4 days after subculturing when the cells
were 70-80% confluent. Fortreatment of AtT-20 cells in culture with
neuraminidase from V. cholera, the media was replaced with 1 ml of
serum-free Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium containingeither
neuraminidase buffer or buffer containing 0.17 unit/ml of neuraminidase from V. cholera and incubated for 24 h. After incubation, the
cells were removed from the plates with phosphate-buffered saline,
washed 3 times with phosphate-buffered saline to remove all traces
of neuraminidase, and the cells homogenized in Buffer 1. The homogenate was centrifuged a t 40,000 X g for 20 min and the crude
membrane pellet resuspended in Buffer 1. [1251]MK678 binding to
the control and treated crude membranes was accomplished by vacvalues were
uum filtration as previously described (25). Kd and Bmax
calculated from homologous displacement curves analyzed by the
curve fitting program LIGAND (36).
For the effect of neuraminidase treatment on SRIF inhibition of
forskolin-stimulated cAMP production, AtT-20cells were plated and
treated as above except that 24-well plates were used and the cells
plated at anapproximate density of 0.5 X lo6 cells/well. After treatment, the cells were preincubated with 10 mM isobutylmethylxanthine for 30 min, then treated with either 50 mM forskolin alone or
forskolin and 0.1 PM SRIF in the presence of 10 mM isobutylmethylxanthine for 30 min. The reaction was stopped by the removal of
the culture media and the addition of 0.5 mlof0.1 M HCl. cAMP
accumulation in the control and treated cells was measured using a
commercially available radioimmunoassay from Du Pont New EngI
2
3
land Nuclear following the manufacturer's directions.
For the agonist protection studies, AtT-20 cell membranes were
C
prepared as described above. The crude membranes were preincubated for 1.5 h a t 25 "C in the presence of buffer or 100 nM MK 678
Y
-Y
. ..
to attainequilibrium with the agonist. After the preincubation treatment, 0.1 unit/ml of neuraminidase from V. cholera was added and
"
the mixture allowed to incubate for an additional 5 h. The samples
1
2
3
4
5
were then rinsed free of the MK 678 and neuraminidase by washing
FIG. 1. Deglycosylation of control proteins byendo-and
the membranes twice with an Hanks' balanced salt solution/sodium
exoglycosidases. Control glycoproteins (0.1 mg/ml) were subjected acetate, pH 5, buffer; a treatment which was able to completely
to treatment with endo and exoglycosidases as described under "Ex- remove any traces of agonist with no deleterious effects on the SRIF
perimental Procedures." The proteins were treated overnight at 25 "C, receptors (62). The washed, control and treatedmembranes were then
the reaction stopped by the addition of sodium dodecyl sulfate sample measured for their ability to bind [ 1251]MK678 as described previously
buffer. The proteins were then subjected to sodium dodecyl sulfate- (25).
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and stained with Coomassie Blue.
Panel A, treatment of 0.1 mg of ribonuclease b with buffer (lane I ) ,
RESULTS
Endo F (lane 2), Endo
H (lane 3),and PNGaseF (lane 4 ) . The upper
In previous studies (25), we have shownthat rat brain SRIF
of the two bands in lane 1 represents the glycosylated form of
ribonuclease b and thelower band, the deglycosylated form. Panel B, receptors canbe solubilized using the detergentCHAPS. The
treatment of desialylated a,-acid glycoprotein with buffer (lane 1), 0- solubilized receptors retain their high affinity and specificity
galactosidase (lane 2), and 0-galactosidase and 0-N-acetylglucosa- for SRIFagonists, including the highly stable SRIFanalogue
minidase (lane 3).Panel C, Newcastle disease virus preparation alone ['251]MK678. [1251]MK678 was shown to bindreversibly and
(lane 1 ) or treatment of al-acid glycoprotein with Newcastle disease
virus (lane 2),buffer (lane 3), or al-acid glycoprotein with neuramin- with high affinity to the solubilized SRIF receptors with the
binding reaction attaining equilibrium by 90 min at 25 "C.
idase from V. cholera (lane 4 ) or buffer (lane 5). Size markers (in
The solubilized SRIF receptors maintained their coupling to
kDa) are indicated to the left of each gel.

Glycosidase Treatment
For glycosidase treatment, solubilized brain membranes were diluted to 2 mM CHAPS and theresulting solution concentrated &fold
using Centricon 30 or Centriprep 30 microconcentrators (Amicon).
All enzymatic treatments were for 16 h at 25 "C under the conditions
described below. After the deglycosylation treatments, thesolubilized
membranes were assayed for specific [1Z51]MK678 binding. The
overnightincubations in the absence of any treatment generally
resulted in less than a 30% decrease in the original specific SRIF
receptor binding and the enzymes themselves did not interfere with
the specific binding of["'I]MK 678 to solubilized SRIF receptors.
Additionally, all enzymes were observed to completely deglycosylate
the control glycoproteins al-acid glycoprotein, ribonuclease b, or
ovalbumin under the treatment conditions described below (Fig. 1)
and no contaminating proteolytic activity was observed. For these
control studies, the glycoproteins were incubated under conditions
identical to those used to deglycosylate solubilized SRIF receptors.
After treatment, the glycoproteins were subjected to polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis, visualized by Coomassie Blue staining, and the
change in migration of the control glycoproteins compared to previously reported changes in molecular weight after deglycosylation. As
shown in Fig. 1, each glycosidase treatment resulted in sharp distinct
shifts in migration of the control glycoproteins, consistent with the
complete removal of the appropriate oligosaccharides, rather than
incomplete cleavages of the sugars.
Endoglycosidase Digests-PNGase F (Flavobacterium meningosepticum) was used at a concentration of 30-60 units/ml and as shown
in Fig. 1 was able to completely deglycosylate ribonuclease b. Endo
D (Diplococcuspneumonia) was used at a concentration of 0.1 unit/
ml and was able to completely deglycosylate ovalbumin. For Endo F
(F. meningosepticum) (4.5 units/ml) and Endo H (Streptomycesplicatus) (0.3 unit/ml) treatments, brainmembranes were solubilized as
above, except that potassium phosphate buffer, pH 7.0, was used
throughout. BothEndo F andEndo H were able to completely
deglycosylate ribonuclease b (Fig. 1).
Exoglycosidase Treatment-0-N-Acetyl-D-glucosaminidase (D.
pneumonia) was used at aconcentration of0.17 unit/ml and afucosidase from bovine epididymis a t a concentration of 0.2 unit/ml.

.
1

-2

20097

Carbohydrate Analysis of Somatostatin Receptors
GTP-binding proteins. This was indicated by the finding that
stable GTP analogues abolished high affinity [lZ5I]MK678
binding to solubilized SRIF receptors. Overall, the properties
of [lZ5I]MK678 binding to membrane-bound and solubilized
SRIF receptors are very similar (25).
Lectin Affinity Chromatography of Solubilized SRIF Receptors-Lectin affinity chromatography has been shown to be
very useful in the qualitative structural characterization of
glycoproteins. Therefore, to characterize the carbohydrate
moieties present in rat brain SRIF receptors, we subjected
solubilized SRIF receptors to lectin affinity chromatography.
The results of these studies aresummarized in TableI. Under
the chromatographic conditions described under “Experimental Procedures” all of the lectin affinity columns utilized in
these studies were able to bind control glycoproteins selectively and quantitatively. Previously it was shown that solubilized rat brain SRIF receptors were able to specifically
interact with a WGA-lectin affinity column and could be
eluted with the potent, haptenicsugar N-N‘-N“-triacetylchitotriose (25). Additionally, as shown in Fig. 2 (top), approximately 75% of the recovered solubilized brain SRIF receptors
can be specifically eluted with GlcNAc. This specific interaction of SRIF receptors with WGA would suggest that the
solubilized SRIF receptor contains poly-(GlcNAc) residues
(37,38), and/orterminal sialic acid residues (39,40). To
determine specificallywhich carbohydrate residues on the
SRIF receptor were interacting with WGA, solubilized SRIF
receptors were chromatographed on a succinylated WGAlectin affinity column. After succinylation, WGA retains the
capability to interact with poly-(GlcNAc) residues, but not
sialic acid (41). In our control studies, al-acid glycoprotein,
which interacts with WGA via sialic acid residues, bound
completely to the WGA-lectin affinity column but not to
succinylated WGA column, while approximately 20% of the
loaded ribonuclease b (prepurified over ConA), which does
not contain sialic acids, but does contain GlcNac, bound to
both columns (data not shown). These results are in agreement with the previously reported binding of glycoproteins to
TABLE
I
Specific binding of solubilized rat brain SRIF receptors
to lectin affinity columns
Solubilized rat brain membranes were prepared as described under
“Experimental Procedures.” The solubilized brain proteins were diluted to 5 mM CHAPS and a 1-ml sample applied to an agarosebound lectin affinity column (1ml) which had been equilibrated with
50 mM Tris, pH 7.8, containing 5 mM CHAPS, 10% glycerol, and
where appropriate 1 mM CaC12 and 1 mM MgCl2. After an overnight
equilibration the columns were washed with buffer and 2-ml fractions
were collected. Each column was then specifically eluted with 15 ml
of equilibration buffer containing the appropriate haptenicsugar and
1-ml fractions were collected. All fractions were then assayed for
specific [‘“I]MK 678 binding. The equivalent of an average of 60,000
cpm of specific, D-T$-SRIF displaceable, [’251]MK 678binding was
applied to each column. The data represents the percentage of the
recovered specific [IZ5I]MK678 binding that was specifically eluted
by the haptenic sugar and each value is the mean of at least two
experiments.
Column

Specifically eluted

7%

WGA
S. nigra L.
R. communis I
R. communis I1
ConA
Succinylated WGA
D. biflorus
Jacalin
U. europeaus I

20.6
3.9
3.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

FRACnON

1

4a -

1

0

-ON

FIG. 2. Elution profile of solubilized rat brain SRIF receptors from WGA and succinylated WGA-lectin affinity columns. Solubilized rat brain membranes were prepared as described
under “Experimental Procedures.” The solubilized brain membranes
were diluted to 5 mM CHAPS and a 1-mlsample applied to either an
agarose-bound WGA (top) or succinylated WGA (bottom) lectin
affinity column (1ml) which had been equilibrated with 50 mM Tris,
pH 7.8, containing 5 mM CHAPS and 10% glycerol. Approximately
the equivalent of 80,000 and 200,000 cpm of specific [1251]MK 678
binding to solubilized SRIF receptors was loaded onto the WGA and
succinylated WGA columns, respectively. After an overnight equilibration the column was washed with equilibration buffer and 2-ml
fractions collected. The column was then specifically eluted with 15
ml of equilibration buffer containing 0.5 M GlcNAc followed by 7 ml
of 4 mM N-N’-N”-triacetylchitotriose.One-ml fractions were then
collected. All fractions were assayed for specific [1251]MK 678
binding
and representative elution profiles are depicted. The arrows indicate
the points at which 0.5 M GlcNAc and then 4 mM N-N‘-N“-triacetylchitotriose were each added to the column.

WGA and succinylated WGA-lectin affinity columns (41). As
shown in Fig. 2 (bottom), solubilized SRIF receptors applied
to the succinylated WGA column were present only in the
wash buffer and were not specifically eluted from the column
by either GlcNAc or N-N’-N”-triacetylchitotriose,
suggesting
that thesolubilized SRIF receptor did not bind specifically to
succinylated WGA. This finding would indicate that solubilized SRIF receptors are binding primarily to WGA via its
affinity for sialic acid.
Since the solubilized SRIF receptors appeared to be interacting with WGA via its interaction with sialic acids, we
subjected solubilized SRIF receptors to chromatography over
a Sambucus nigra L. lectin affinity column(Fig. 3). This
lectin is able to specifically bind terminal sialic acids present
in a2,6-conformations (42). In our control experiments, S.
nigra L. lectin was able to specifically bind approximately
40% of the al-acid glycoprotein loaded onto the column, an
amount similar to the quantity of a2,6-linked sialic acid
present (34). Solubilized SRIF receptors werespecifically
eluted from the lectin column by lactose, suggesting the
presence of a2,6-linked sialic acids in the SRIF receptors.
Additionally, solubilized SRIF receptors were able t o bind

20098

Carbohydrate Analysis of Somatostatin Receptors
TABLEI1
Effect of endoglycosidase treatment on [125Z]MK678 binding to
solubilized SRZF receptors
Brain membraneswere solubilized as described under“Experimental Procedures.” After solubilization, the proteins were diluted to 2
mM CHAPS and concentrated 5-fold before enzymatic treatments.
Solubilized proteins were treated for 16 h at 25 “C with the appropriate enzyme. After treatment, specific [1251]MK678 binding to solubilized SRIF receptors was assayed and the percent decreasein
specific binding was determinedby comparison witha control sample
incubatedin the absence of exoglycosidase. Average control net
specific [Iz5I]MK 678 binding was equal to 921 f 94 cpm. Data are
means f S.E. of 3-9 separate assays conducted in triplicate.
FRACTION

FIG. 3. Elution profile of solubilized rat brain SRIF receptors froma S. nigra L. lectin affinitycolumn. Solubilized brain

membranes were prepared as described under “Experimental Procedures.” The solubilized rat brain membranes were diluted t o 5 mM
CHAPS and a 1-ml sample appliedto an agarose-bound S. nigra L.
lectin affinitycolumn (1ml) which had beenequilibrated with50 mM
Tris, pH 7.8, containing 5 mM CHAPS and 10% glycerol. Approximately the equivalent of 25,000 cpm of specific [‘251]MK678 binding
to solubilized SRIF receptors was applied to the column. After an
overnight equilibration the column was washed with equilibration
buffer and 2-ml fractions were collected. The column was then
specifically eluted with 15 ml of equilibration buffer containing0.5 M
lactose and 1-ml fractions collected.All fractions were then assayed
for specific [‘251]MK678 binding and a representative elution profile
is depicted. The arrow indicates the point at which 0.5 M lactose was
added tothe column.

Enzyme

Decrease of

[‘*‘I]MK 678 binding
%

PNGase F
Endoglycosidase F
Endoglycosidase H
Endoglycosidase D

24.6 f 8.2 (9)
53.9 & 11.9 (8)
39.9 f 13.1 (9)

0.0 (3)

bohydrates from SRIF receptors reduces the affinity of the
receptor for agonist. This is the first evidence that oligosaccharides have a role in the functional activityof SRIF receptors.
While PNGase treatment is able to establish the presence
is unable toprovide
of N-linked carbohydrates, this treatment
information as to the
specific types of carbohydrate structures
present. Therefore, to determine
more specifically the type(s)
of N-linked carbohydrate group(s) present on the brain SRIF
specifically to R. communis I and I1 lectins (Table I), albeit
t o a small extent, suggesting that (Gal + GlcNAc), polysac- receptors that areinvolved in agonist binding, the solubilized
charides found in hybrid and complex carbohydrate structures brain SRIF receptorswere treated with specific endoglycosiThis result is consistent with
a dases (Table 11). These enzymes all cleave N-linked carboare also present (43, 44).
previous report where only a small fraction of photocross- hydrates between the two GlcNAc residues of the core selinked SRIF receptors fromcerebrocortical membranes were quence of the oligosaccharide with varying substratespecificspecifically eluted from a R. communis I1 column (10).As ities. First, EndoD, which can cleave onlyunsubstituted high
shown in TableI, there appeared to be no
specific binding of mannose-type carbohydrates (51),had no effect on agonist
solubilized SRIF receptors to ConA, Dolichos bifhrus agglu- binding. However, underthesameincubationconditions
tinin, Ulex europeaus I, nor Jacalin lectins, although control Endo D was ableto completely deglycosylate thecontrol
protein ovalbumin. The lack of effect of Endo D on agonist
proteins boundselectively and quantitatively to these lectins,
thus suggesting the lack of high mannose-type carbohydrates, binding to SRIF receptors was consistent with the inability
of the solubilized SRIF receptors to bind
specifically t o ConAN-acetylgalactosamine, fucose, and 0-linked carbohydrates,
lectin affinity columns and suggest that high mannose carrespectively (45).
bohydrate groups are not associated with the SRIFreceptor.
Endoglycosidase Digestion of Solubilized SRIF ReceptorsT h e functional role of carbohydrate groups on receptors and Endo H,which, in general, cleaves highmannose- andhybridproteins in general is not well understood. Glycosylation has type carbohydrates (52),was able to decrease specific [lZ5I]
been observed to havea role in proteintrafficking, as well as MK 678 binding approximately39.9 f 13.1%. Endo F, which,
modulating biological activity (46).However, for most neu- in general, can remove high mannose, hybrid, and certain
complex carbohydrate structures (52), was able to decrease
rotransmitter systems, glycosylation has not been shown to
have a role in the functional activityof the neurotransmitter specific [‘251]MK 678 binding to solubilized SRIF receptors
receptors. In particular,complete removalof the carbohydrate by 53.9 f 11.9%. Both Endo H and Endo F were able to
groups of the &adrenergic (16,17)and muscariniccholinergic completely deglycosylate the control protein ribonuclease b,
(47, 48)
receptors had no effect on agonist binding to these demonstrating that the incubation conditions were suitable
for deglycosylation of glycoproteins by these enzymes (Fig.
receptors. To investigatethe role of glycosylation inthe
biological functioning of SRIF receptors,solubilized SRIF 1). The seemingly differential effects on binding by PNGase
receptors were subjected to selective hydrolysiswith glycolytic F, Endo H, and Endo F could either be due t o variability in
enzymes and the effect on specific agonist binding to SRIF the efficiencies of each of the enzymes to deglycosylate SRIF
receptors examined. PNGase F has been shown to hydrolyze receptors under nondenaturing conditions, that is the enmost types of N-linked carbohydrate groups from glycopro- zymes have differingcapabilities of accessing the cleavage site
receptors, or these findings couldbe suggestive
teins at a point between the di-GlcNAc core and theAsn t o on native SRIF
of SRIF
which the carbohydrate is linked (49,50). Treatment of sol- of heterogeneityinthecarbohydratecomponent
F resulted ina decrease receptors. Therefore, at least qualitatively, these resultswould
ubilized SRIF receptors with PNGase
of 24.6 f 8.2% in specific [lZ5I]MK678 binding tosolubilized suggest that solubilized SRIF receptors specifically contain
either hybrid, or a combination of hybrid and complex carSRIF receptor (Table 11). As shownin Fig. 1, underthe
involved in high affinity agonist
incubation conditions employed for these studies the control bohydrate structures that are
receptors. This is the first suchevidence that
protein ribonuclease b was completely deglycosylated,
with binding to SRIF
no evidence of proteolysis,by treatment with PNGase F. carbohydrate groups are involved in the high affinity binding
receptor.
These findings suggest that removal of some N-linked car- of agonists to the SRIF

20099

Carbohydrate Analysisof Somatostatin Receptors
Exoglycosidase Treatment of Solubilized SRIF ReceptorsAs described above, the use of endoglycolytic enzymes suggested that the carbohydrate groups on solubilized SRIF
receptors were involvedin high affinity binding of agonists to
the receptor. In order to establish whether specific monosaccharidesin the carbohydratestructuresareimportant
for
agonist binding to solubilized SRIF receptors, the effect of a
variety of exoglycosidases on [ Y ] M K 678 binding to SRIF
receptors was examined. These enzymes are able to cleave
only those residues on the nonreducing terminus of an oligosaccharide branch. As shown in Table 111, @-N-acetylglucosaminidase (D.pneumonia), reduced specific binding of [lZ5I]
MK 678 by approximately 30%. At the low concentrations
employed in this study, only @-GlcNAcresidues present in
@1,2-conformationsat the nonreducing terminus of sugar
chains, and not the bisecting GlcNAc residue present in a
@l,4-conformation,will be cleaved by the 8-N-acetylglucosaminidase from D.pneumonia (53). This would suggest that a
portion of the nonreducing chains of the oligosaccharides
associated with solubilized SRIF receptors terminate in @GlcNAc. 8-Galactosidase (D.pneumonia) was also found to
decrease specific [lZ5I]MK678 binding by approximately 25%
(Table 111). Both of these enzymes were able to completely
remove the appropriate carbohydrates from desialylated alacid glycoprotein under the incubation conditions employed
in thisstudy (Fig. 1).In contrast,a-fucosidase (bovine epididymis) appeared to have no effect on specific binding to solubilized SRIF receptors.
The high degree of binding of solubilized rat brain SRIF
receptors to WGA and S. nigra L. lectin affinity columns, but
not succinylated WGA-lectin affinity columns, suggested that
sialic acids were a component of the carbohydrate groups
present on the SRIF receptor. To determine if sialic acids
influence the functional activity of SRIF receptors, solubilized
rat brain SRIF receptors were treated with neuraminidase
from V. cholera. This enzyme was able to completely disialylate al-acidglycoprotein under the incubation conditions used
inthis study (Fig. 1). As shown in Fig.4, treatment of
solubilized SRIF receptors with neuraminidase from V. cholera resulted in the complete loss of specific high affinity [lZ5I]
MK 678 binding to SRIFreceptors. The effect of neuraminidase treatmentwas time dependent with the complete loss of
high affinity [lZ5I]MK678 binding by 24 h. The complete loss
of high affinity binding to the SRIF
receptor after neuraminidase treatment suggests that sialic acids play a critical role
in the directing of agonist binding to SRIFreceptors.
V. cholera neuraminidase is able to cleave terminal sialic
TABLE111
Effect of enoglycosidase treatment on [1‘511MK678 binding to
solubilized SRZF receptors
Brain membranes were solubilized as described under “Experimental Procedures.” After solubilization, the proteins were diluted to 2
m M CHAPS and concentrated 5-fold before enzymatic treatments.
Solubilized membrane proteins were treated for 16 h at 25 “C with
the appropriate enzyme. After treatment, specific [1251]MK678 binding to solubilized SRIF receptors was assayed and the percent decrease in specific binding was determined by comparison with a
control sample incubated in the absence of endoglycosidase. Net
specific [Iz5I]MK 678 binding in control samples was equal to 924 f
138 cpm. Data are means f S.E. of 3-7 separate assays conducted in
triplicate.
Enzyme

Decrease of

[1251]MK678 binding
%

0-Galactosidase
P-N-Acetylglucosaminidase
a-Fucosidase

24.9 & 14.4 (3)
30.6 & 13.7 (5)
0.0 (3)

TIYE (HOURS)

FIG. 4. Time course of treatment of solubilized rat brain
SRIF receptors with neuraminidase from V. cholera and Newcastle disease virus. Solubilizedrat brain membranes were prepared
as described under “Experimental Procedures,” diluted to contain 2
mM CHAPS, and concentrated 5-fold. The solubilized membranes
were incubated for increasing amounts of time with 0.167 unit/ml of
V. chobra (M) or 0.08 unit/ml of Newcastle disease virus neuraminidase (0).Data are representative of two separate experiments conducted in triplicate.

acids that arepresent on nonreducing termini in a2,3-,
a2,6-, as well as a2,8-conformations (34). Another exoglycosidase, Newcastle disease virus neuraminidase, has been demonstrated to specifically cleaveonly those terminalsialic acids
present in a2,3- and a2,8-conformations (34). al-Acid glycoprotein containsequal amounts of a2,3- and a2,6-linked sialic
acids (34). As shown in Fig. 1,under the incubation conditions
used in this study, neuraminidase from V. cholera was able to
remove all of the sialic acids, while neuraminidase from Newcastle disease virus was only able to remove approximately
50% of the sialic acids on the control protein, indicating that
both neuraminidases were cleaving the appropriate types of
sialic acids found on cyl-acid glycoprotein. Treatment of solubilized SRIF receptors with Newcastle disease virus neuraminidase did not result in any changes in specific [lZ5I]MK
678 binding (Fig. 4). The dramatic loss of high affinity [ T I
MK 678 binding to solubilized SRIF receptors following treatment with neuraminidase from V. cholera, suggests an important role for terminal sialic acid residues, present in a2,6linkages, in the functional activity of SRIF receptors.
Sialic acids are negatively charged molecules at physiological pH (54). Interestingly, structure-activity relationship
studies have demonstrated that the portion of SRIF critical
for binding to itsreceptor contains apositively charged lysine
residue (55). Since sialic acid residues are associated with the
extracellular surface of cells, they may be associated with the
ligand-binding site of the receptor and may serve to attract
SRIF agonists to the receptor through electrostatic interactions. To investigate this hypothesis, studies were conducted
on the effect on neuraminidase treatment of intact AtT-20
cells. AtT-20 cells are apituitary-derived tumor cell line which
express a high density of SRIF receptors with the same
physical, pharmacological, and functional characteristics as
brain SRIF receptors (14, 64). Overnight treatment of intact
AtT-20 cells in culture with neuraminidase from V. cholera
reduced specific [lZ5I]MK678 binding to SRIF receptors in
membranes prepared from these cells by about 50%. The
decrease in binding was due to a loss of high affinity [lZ5I]MK
678 binding sites as indicated by the Scatchard analysis of
homologous displacement of [ Y ] M K 678 binding to membranesprepared
from controlandneuraminidase-treated
AtT-20 cells (Fig. 5). The loss of high affinity binding sites
could either be due to a conversion of high affinity sites to
lower affinity sites which cannot be detected with [lZ5I]MK
678 or a physical loss or inactivation of a population of SRIF

Carbohydrate Analysis of Somatostatin
Receptors

20100

800

400

2w
0
-10

-12

-8

4

MK 678 (MI

FIG. 5. [‘251]MK 678 binding to neuraminidase-treated
AtT-20 cells in culture. AtT-20 cells in culturewere treated for 24
h with 0.1 unit/ml of neuraminidase from V. cholera as detailed under
“Experimental Procedures.” Membranes were prepared from control
(0)and treated AtT-20 (0)cells and [lZ51]MK 678(50 pM) binding
was inhibited by varying concentrations of MK 678. The data from
the inhibition curves was analyzed by the method of Scatchard using
the LIGAND curve fitting program (inset). The linearization of the
inhibition curves revealed a single [lZ5I]MK678 binding site with K d
values of 0.15 & 0.04 and 0.11 f 0.03 nM and B,, values of 2848 f
508 and 1609 & 420 fmoles/mg of protein for control and treated
cells, respectively. Data are representative examples of three studies
conducted in duplicate.

2

oL

200

I

II

111

FIG. 6. cAMP accumulationin AtT-20 cells after neuraminidase treatment. AtT-20 cells in culturewere treated with 0.1 unit/
ml of neuraminidase from V. cholera for 24 h as described under
“Experimental Procedures.” Control (open bars) and treated (hatched
bars) AtT-20 cells were then preincubated with 50 mM isobutylmethylxanthine for 30 min and treated with Z, buffer, ZZ, 50 mM forskolin
M SRIF for 30 min. The cAMP accumulated was measured
and
by radioimmunoassay ( A ) . Specific [‘251]MK 678 binding to SRIF
receptors in these same cultures was also measured ( B ) .Data averages
& S.E. of four experiments conducted in duplicate.

receptors. To investigate whether desialylated SRIF receptors
were still functionally active we examined the ability of SRIF
to inhibit forskolin-stimulated cAMP production in control
and neuraminidase-treated AtT-20 cells in culture. Based on
the data in Fig. 6, the apparent loss of high affinity [lZ5I]MK
678 sites after neuraminidase treatment appears to be due to
the conversion of SRIF receptors to a low affinity conformation for agonists since SRIF maximally inhibited forskolinstimulated cAMP accumulation to thesame extent in control
and neuraminidase-treated AtT-20 cells. Since SRIF induced
the same maximal response in both groups of cells, the neuraminidase treatment did not inactivate SRIF receptors. No
differences in basal or forskolin-stimulated cAMP accumulation were observed between the control and neuraminidasetreated cells, nor were there any changes in morphology or
protein content of the cells, suggesting that the effects on

high affinity [’251]MK678 binding to SRIF receptors were not
due to nonselective effects of the neuraminidase treatments.
This partial loss of high affinity binding to SRIFreceptors in
platedintact AtT-20 cells is most likely reflective of the
inaccessibility of some sialic acid residues on native SRIF
receptors to the neuraminidase, since treatment of membranes prepared from AtT-20 cells with neuraminidase for 24
h resulted in a 90% loss of [lZ5I]MK678 binding, similar to
that which wasobserved with solubilizedbrain SRIF receptors
(data not shown). Since SRIF inhibition of forskolin-stimulated cAMP formation requires the coupling of SRIF receptors
to the catalytic subunit of adenylylcyclase via GTP-binding
proteins, the ability of SRIF to inhibit forskolin-stimulated
cAMP accumulation to the same extent in control and neuraminidase-treated cells, suggests that despite the loss of high
affinity agonist binding to a substantial population of SRIF
receptors, all of the receptors remain functionally active and
coupled to GTP-binding proteins. The partial loss of high
affinity [lZ5I]MK678 binding sites, but the maintenance of
full functional responsiveness could be due to the existence
of spare receptors. However, there is no evidence that spare
SRIF receptors exist on AtT-20 cells (56, 57). This being the
case, neuraminidase treatment appears to
have removed sialic
acid residues from the extracellular surface of a large population of SRIF receptors in AtT-20 cells to reduce highaffinity
agonist binding without altering GTP-binding protein coupling to thereceptor.
The finding that the cleavage of sialic acid residues from
the extracellular surface of AtT-20 cells greatly reduces high
affinity agonist binding to SRIFreceptors, suggests that sialic
acids are near, orat, theligand binding site of SRIF receptors.
To test this hypothesis, we determined whether neuraminidase treatment could still affect SRIF receptors when the
receptor wasoccupied with agonist. As shown in Fig. 7,
pretreatment of AtT-20 cell membranes with a saturating
concentration of MK 678 (100 nM), prior to binding [lZ5I]MK
678 to SRIF receptors, did not affect the ability of [lZ5I]MK
678 to bind to SRIF receptors after extensive washing. These
findings indicate that residual MK 678 was not bound to
SRIF receptors. In AtT-20 cell membranes exposed to MK
678 (100 nM) and neuraminidase, neuraminidase treatment
had little effect on SRIF receptors, whereas in AtT-20 cell

A

B

FIG. 7. Treatment of SRIF receptors from AtT-20 cellmembranes in the presence of agonist. AtT-20 cell membranes were
prepared as described under “Experimental Procedures” and the
crude membranes preincubated for 1.5 h at 25 “C in the presence of
Z, buffer or ZZ, 100 nM MK 678. After the preincubation, either buffer
(open bars) or 0.1unit/ml of neuraminidase from V. cholera (hatched
bars) was added for an additional 5 h. The samples were then rinsed
free of MK 678 and neuraminidase by washing the membranes twice
with Hanks’ balanced salt solution/sodium acetate,pH 5. The
washed, control, and treated membranes were then measured for their
ability to bind [1251]MK 678.Depicted are the results of a representative example of three studies conducted in duplicate.

Carbohydrate Analysis of Somatostatin Receptors
membranes incubated with neuraminidase alone, specific
['251]MK 678 binding was reduced by 75%. The protection
from the effects of the neuraminidase treatment afforded the
SRIF receptors byMK 678 was specific since the inactive
SRIF analogue, SRIF 28 (1-14), did not prevent neuraminidase from reducing high affinity agonist binding to SRIF
receptors (data not shown).

20101

nent of rat brain SRIF receptors appears to play a role in
promoting high affinity agonist binding. The results of the
deglycosylation studies indicated that terminal residues, primarily sialic acid, found in either complex or hybrid structures, are required for the high affinity binding of the radioactive agonist [lZ5I]MK678 to solubilized SRIF receptors. The
role of the carbohydrate portion of the SRIF receptors in
maintaining the high affinity state for agonists are in contrast
DISCUSSION
to whathas been described for agonist binding to other
We have recently reported that rat brain SRIF receptors neurotransmitter receptors, such as the al-(58) and &adrecan be solubilized in a high affinity state using the detergent nergic (16, 17), A1 adenosine (59), D2 dopamine (60), andM1
CHAPS and can be detected by the SRIF analogue [lZ5I]MK (47) and M2 (48) muscarinic receptors. Many of these studies
678 (25). These solubilized receptors were shown to retain have shown that the sugar component of neurotransmitter
their pharmacological specificities for SRIF analogues and receptors do not have a role in agonist binding, but instead
have provided a model system by which we could investigate may function to direct the transportation and accumulation
of the receptors at the cell surface. Interestingly, sialic acids
the carbohydrate nature of brain SRIF receptors. In this
report, we have studied the composition of the carbohydrate have been suggested to play a role in the binding of vasoactive
found on solubilized rat brain SRIF receptors by lectin affinity intestinal peptide to its receptor (61). The requirement for
chromatography, and determined their functional role by sialic acid residues and/or intact polysaccharide chains for
vasoactive intestinal
enzymatic deglycosylation. By using these techniques, we high affinity agonist binding to SRIF and
receptors
may
represent
an
inherent
property
of the active
have shown that solubilized rat brain SRIF receptors are posttranslationally modified to contain one or more polysaccha- sites of these peptidergic receptors that differs from the hyrides N-linked to Asn residues. Asparagine-linked carbohy- drophobic binding domains of nonpeptidergic receptors.
In general, sialic acid residues are oriented towards the
drates are classified into three types, high mannose, hybrid,
and complex, based on the sugar substitutions present on the extracellular surface of cells. Therefore, sialic acid residues
core oligosaccharides.The N-linked carbohydrates present in associated with the ligand-binding site of SRIF receptors
solubilized SRIF receptors that are involved in high affinity could influence agonist binding to the receptor through elecbinding appear to be either of hybrid or a combination of trostatic interactions. Thisis suggested by the highly negative
hybrid and complex types. This is based on the effects of charge density of sialic acid residues at physiological pH (54)
Endoglycosidases F and H treatment on high affinity agonist and the positively charged lysine observed to be crucial for
binding to solubilized SRIF receptors and is supportedby the SRIF's ability to bind to its receptors with high affinity (55).
ability of some solubilized SRIF receptors to specifically bind In fact, substitution of the lysine with non-charged amino
to R. communis I andI1 lectin affinity columns. Furthermore, acids has been reported to greatly reduce the binding affinity
of the peptide to SRIF receptors (55), and in preliminary
the lack of binding to ConA suggested the absence of any high
mannose-type carbohydrate on the SRIFreceptor, which is a studies we have found that acetylation of the lysine residue
in MK 678, to remove the positive charge, reduces the affinity
finding consistent with other previous studies (10, 21). This
of AtT-20 cell SRIF receptors for MK 678by 50-fold.' Further
conclusion was also supported by the lack of effect of Endo D
evidence supporting arole for sialic acid residues in promoting
treatment on agonist binding to thesolubilized receptors and,
high affinity binding to SRIF receptors is provided by the
additionally, in preliminary studies, treatment of solubilized
results of the studies on intact AtT-20 cells, in which the
SRIF receptors with a-mannosidase (almond) did not induce
intact cells were treated with neuraminidase to remove sialic
clear alterations in the high affinity binding of [lZ5I]MK678
acid residues from the extracellular surface of the cells. There
to SRIF receptors.
was a significant decrease in high affinity agonist binding to
Aside from the determination of the types of carbohydrate the membranes of treated cells, while in contrast, the ability
groups present on the solubilized SRIF receptor, more detailed of the receptors to mediate SRIF inhibition of cAMP accudescriptions of the oligosaccharides associated with the SRIF mulation was not hindered by treatment of the cells with
receptors can be drawn from the results presented herein. neuraminidase. These findings suggest that neuraminidase
First, the polysaccharide component involved in maintaining treatment reduced the affinity of most SRIF receptors for
the solubilized SRIF receptor in a high affinity state for agonists, but did not significantly affect SRIF receptor/GTPagonist binding does not appearto contain abisecting GlcNAc binding protein coupling, since SRIF receptors must be couresidue. This would be evidenced by the lack of interaction of pled to Gi to mediate SRIF inhibition of cAMP accumulation
solubilized SRIF receptors with succinylated WGA, which has and adenylylcyclase activity (63, 65). Therefore, it is possible
highest affinity for the P-GlcNac-(1+4)-fi-GlcNac-(1+4)that theremoval of sialic acid residues from the extracellular
GlcNac structure which is present in carbohydrate structures surface of SRIF receptors reduces the affinity of the receptors
containing a bisecting GlcNAc residue. Second, the polysac- for agonist, but these lower affinity sites are stillfunctionally
charide chains do not appear to be fucosylated, since the able to mediate the effects of high concentrations of SRIF on
solubilized receptor did not specificallybind to a U. europueus adenylylcyclase activity. Thus, both sialic acid residues assoI lectin affinity column, nor was there any affect on agonist ciated with SRIF receptors, in addition to GTP-binding probinding when the receptor was treated with a-fucosidase. tein coupling with the receptors, contribute to the mainteThird, there appears be
toterminal sialic acid residues present nance of SRIF receptors in a high affinity biologically active
in a2,6-linkages on the carbohydrate structuresof solubilized conformation.
SRIF receptors. This was demonstrated by the specific bondThe ability fo the stable SRIF agonist MK 678 to protect
ing of solubilized SRIF receptors to theS. nigra L. lectin and SRIF receptors from the effects of neuraminidase treatment,
the loss of high affinity agonist binding to SRIF receptors suggests that sialic acid residues may be closely associated
after treatment with neuraminidase from V. cholera, but not with the ligand-binding site of the receptor. However, these
with Newcastle disease virus neuraminidase.
In our study we have shown that the carbohydrate compoK. Raynor and T. Reisine, unpublished observations.

20102

Carbohydrate
Analysis

of Somatostatin
Receptors

results may also be explained by the conversion of the agonistbound SRIF receptor into a conformation in which the sialic
acid residues are no longer accessible to the neuraminidase.
Clear identification of the localization of the sialic acid residues in the SRIF receptor, and their role in the functioning
of the receptor, will require further detailed physical characterization.
In conclusion, we have shown that the carbohydrate component of SRIF receptors are involved in promoting high
affinity agonist binding. We have also provided evidence that
terminal sialic acid residues are specifically involved in the
promotion of high affinity binding to SRIF receptors. The
specific mechanism by which sialic acid residues influence
agonist binding to SRIF receptors is currently being investigated. Furthermore, the role of the sugar groups in thedetermining physical and functional heterogeneity of SRIF receptors is also currently being studied.
REFERENCES
1. Epelhaum, J. (1986) Prog. Neurobiol. 27,63-100
2. Pittman, Q.J., and SiFins,G. R (1981) Brain Res. 221, 402-408

3. Chesselet, M.-F., and elsme, T (1983) J. Neurosci. 3, 232-236
4. Martin-Iversen, M., Radke, J., and Vincent, S. (1986) P h a r m o f . Biochern.
Behau. 24,1707-1714
5. Brazeau, P., Vale, W., Burgus, R., Ling, N., Rivier, J., and Guillemin, R.
(1972) Science 129, 77-79
6. Mandarino, L., Stenner, D., Blanchard, W., Nissen, S., Gerich, J., Ling, N.,
Brazeau, P., Bohlem, P., Esch, E., andGuillemin, R. (1981) Nature 291,
76-78
7. Vaysse, N., Pradayrd, L., Chayvialle, A,, Pignal, F., Esteve, J., Susini, C.,
Descos, F., and Rlhet, A. (1981) Endocrinology 108, 1843-1847
8. Sakamoto, C., Nagao, M., Matozaki, T., Nishizaki, H., Konda, K., and
Baha, S. (1988) J. Biol. Chern. 263,14441-14445
9. Knuhtsen. S.. Esteve. J. P.. Bernadet.. B..IVavsse.
"
IN.. _and Susini., C. (1988)
.
.
Biochem. j.254,641-647
10. Sakamoto, C., Najoa, M., Matazaki, T.,Nishizaki, H., Konda, Y., and Baba,
S. (1988) J. Biol. Chern. 263,14441-14445
11. Cotroneo, P., Marie, J., and Rosselin, G. (1988) Eur. J. Biochern. 174,219224
12. Susini, C., Bailey, A., Szecowka, J., and Williams, J. A. (1986) J. Biol.
Chern. 261,16738-16743
13. Thermos. K.. He. H.-T... Marsolis. N.. and Reisine.. T. (1989)
Neuroscience
.
31,13i-141
14. He. H.-T.. Johnson. K.. Thermos. K.. and Reisine. T. (1989)
Proc. Natl.
,
,~
Acad. Sci. U. S. A: 86,1480-1848 '
15. Reyl-Desmars, F., Le Roux, S., Linard, C., Benkouka, F., and Lewin, M. J.
M. (1989) J. Biol. Chern. 264.18789-18795
16. Stiles,'G. L., Benovic, J. L., Caron, M. G., and Lefkowitz, R. J. (1984) J.
Biol. Chern. 259.8655-8663
17. Benovic, J. L.,-Staniszewski, C., Cerione, R. A,, Codina, J., Lefkowitz, R.
J., and Caron,M. C. (1987) J. Recept. Res. 7,257-281
18. Grigoriadis, D. E., and De Souza, E. B. (1989) Endocrinology 125, 1877I

~

~~

lRRR

19. Baiy&ton, W. W., Jacobson, K. A., and Stiles, G. L. (1990) Mol. Pharrnacol. 38,177-183
20. Jarvie, K. R., Niznik, H. B., and Seeman, P. (1988) Mol. Pharrnacol. 34,
a1-m
UI-0 I

21. Lewis, L. D., and Williams, J. A. (1987) Endocrinology 121,486-492
22. Zeggari, G., Viguerie, N., Susini, C., Garnier, M., Esteve, J.-P., and Rihet,
A. (1987) Eur. J. Biochern. 164,667-673
23. Marie, J.-C., Cotroneo, P., de Chasseval, R., and Rosselin, G. (1989) Eur.
J. Biochern. 186,181-188
24. Knuhtsen, S., Esteve, J.-P., Camhillau, C., Colas, B., Susini, C., and Vaysse,
N. (1990) J. Biol. Chern. 265,1129-1133
25. He, H.-T., Rens-Domiano, S., Martin, J.-M., Law, S. F., Borsilow, S.,

Woolkalis, M., Manning, D., and Reisine, T. (1990) Mol. Pharrnacol. 37,
614-621
26. Jakobs, K., and Schultz, G. (1983) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 80,38993902
27. Lewis, D., Weight, F., and Luini, A. (1986) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.
83,9035-9039..
28. Inoue, M., Nakayma, S., and Nakajima, Y. (1988) J. Physiol. 407, 1771Q5

29. W&, H. L., Bogen, C., Reisine, T., and Dichter, M. (1989) Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 86,9616-9620
30. Wang, H.-L., Dichter, M., and Reisine, T. (1990) Mol. Pharrnacol. 38,357361
31. Thermos, K., Meglasson, M., Nelson, J., Loundsberry, K., and Reisine, T.
(1990) Am. J. Physiol. 259, E216-E224
32. Brown, M., Rivier, J., and Vale, W. (1981) Endocrinology 108, 2391-2393
33. Smith, P. R., Krohn, G., Hermanson, A,, Malia, F., Gartner, M., Provenzano. E.. Fuiimoto. E.. Goeke. N.. Olsen. B.. and Klenk. D. (1985) Anal.
B i o c k k . 150,76185'
34. Paulson, J. C., Weinstein, J., Dorland, L., van Halbeek, H., and Vliegenthart, J. F. G. (1982) J. Biol. Chern. 257.12734-12738
thart.
257,12734-12738
35. Warren, L. L. (1959) J.
j.Biol. Chern. 234,1971-1975
36. Munson, P. J., and Rodhard, D. (1980) Anal. Biochern. 107,220-239
37. Allen, A. K., Neuherger, A,, and Sharon, N. (1973) Biochern. J. 131, 155I

,

~

~I

,

162

38. Goidstein. I. J.. Hammarstrom.. S... andSundblad. , G. .(1975)
. Biochern.
Biophys. Acta405,53-61
39. Peters, B. P., Ehisu, S., Goldstein, I. J., and Flashner, M. (1979) Biochernutv 18,5505-5511
40. Bhavanandan, V. P., and Katlic, A. W. (1979) J. Biol. Chern. 254, 40004008
41. Monsigny, M., Roche, A.-C., Sene, C., Maget-Dana, R., and Delmotte, F.
M. (1980) Eur. J. Biochern. 104,147-153
42. Shibuya, N., Goldstein, I. J., Broekaert,W. F., Nsimha-Lubaki, M., Peeters,
B., and Peumans, W. J. (1987) Arch. Biochern. Biophys. 2 5 4 , l - 8
43. Baenziger, J. U., and Fiete, D. (1979) J. Biol. Chern. 254,9795-9799
44. Green, E. D., Brodbeck, R. M., and Baenziger, J. U. (1987) J. Biol. Chern.
2 6 2 , 12030-12039
45. Goldstein, I. J., andPoretz, R.D. (1986) in The Lectinss: Properties,
Functions, and Applications (Liener, I. E., Sharon, N., Goldstein, I. J.,
eds) pp. 33-243, Academic Press, New York
46. Baenziger, J. U., and Green, E. D. (1988) Biochern. Biophys. Acta 947,
301-303
47. Rauh. J. J.. Lambert. M. P.. Cho. N. J.. Chin. H.. and Klein. W. L. (1986)
J. Neurochern. 46,'23-32'
48. van Koppen, C. J., and Nathanson, N. M. (1990) J. Biol. Chern. 2 6 5 ,
20887-20892
49. Elder, J. H., and Alexander, S. (1982) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 7 9 ,
'

'

'

'

52. Male;, F., TGmhle, R. B., Tarentino, A. L., and Plummer, T. H., Jr. (1989)
Anal. Biochern. 180,195-204
53. Yamashita, K., Ohkura, T., Yoshima, H., and Kohata, A. (1981) Biochern.
Biophys. Res. Cornrnun. 100,226-232
54. Schauer, R. (1982) in Sialic Acids, Chernistu, Metabolism and Function
(Schauer, R., ed) pp. 1-52, Springer-Verlag, New York
55. Brown, M., Rivier, J., and Vale, W. (1976) Endocrinology 9 8 , 336-343
56. Reisine, T. (1985) J. Pharrnacol. Ex Ther. 229,14-20
57. Mahv. N.. Woolkalis. M.. Mannlne.
-, f?.. and Reisine. T. (1988) J. Pharrnacol.
&p. Ther. 247,390-396
58. Sawutz, D.G., Lanier, S. M., Warren, C. D., and Graham, R.M. (1987)
Mol. Pharrnacol. 32,565-571
59. Klotz, K.-N., and Lohse, M. J. (1986) Eiochern. Biophys. Res. Cornrnun.
140,406-413
60. Jarvie, K. R., Niznik, H. B., Bzowej, N. H., and Seeman, P. (1988) J.
Biochern. (Tokyo) 104,791-794
61. El Battari, A,, Luis, J., Martin, J. M., Fantini, J., Muller, J. M., Marvaldl,
J., and Pichon,J. (1988) Biochern J. (1987) 242,185-191
62. Presky, D. H., and Schonhrunn, A. (1988) J. B ~ o l Chern.
.
263,714-721
63. Mahy, N., Woolkalis, M., Manning,D., and Reisine, T. (1988) J. Pharrnacol.
Exp. Ther. 246,779-785
64. Thermos, K., and Reisine, T. (1988) Mol. Pharrnacol. 33,370-377
65. Jakobs, K., Aktories, K., and Schultz, G. (1983) Nature 303, 177-178
I

I

.

,

I

