
## Introduction

Overall disease desctiption

  First paragraph: start broadly the research area and then
  narrow down to my own particular focus. This is to help me
  position my research topic within the broader field, making the
  work accessible to broader audience, not just to specialists in
  my field.

  Disease                    Explain the disease itself

  Gene sequening and         What causes it, on the 
  mutational analysis        genetic level

  mRNA analysis              Expression research conducted so 
                             far

  Protein function Protein   What is know about the protein
  isolation                  its function and sialic acid

  Cell localization of GNE   The 2005 article - Kraus
  protein
  

  My field - Localizing GNE  Proxy to Frankenbodies.
  protein in zebrafish.

  State the aims and importance
  Papers rejected for "not showing the importance of the topic"
  or "lacking clear motivation" usually neglect this point. I
  should state what I want to achieve and why my reader should be
  interested in finding out whether I achieve it. The basic
  structure can be as simple as "We aim to do X, which is
  important because it will lead to Y". 

  How GNE protein target the Golgi and what mechanism retains its
  stay in the golgi remains elusive. Golgi localization may
  involve disparate regions of a protein rather than a single
  discrete signal [42]. For golgi resident glycosy; transferases
  twp basic models have been proposed. 1. N-terminal signal
  sequence adjacent to the transmembrane domain mediates Golgi
  tergeting. 2. Subset of golgi resident proteins are recruited
  to the organelle by a process known as kin recognition that
  involves protein-protein interactio in the stem region of the
  protein [43]. GNE targeting might depend on protein-protein
  interaction with other golgi-resident proteins according to the
  kin recognition model mediating precise localization within th
  e golgi stacks. ALternatively, GNE might be anchored to golgi
  membranes by covalently attached fatty acid chains like
  myristoyll or farnesys/ Finally, we cannot exclude the
  possibility of different GNE splice forms [37] mediating
  specific targeting to the cytoplasm or the nucleus. Mutational
  analysis will be needed to clarify this issue.

 Our results suggest a dynamic localization with GNE moving in a
 temporal sequence between several subcellular compartments
 before adopting a steady state. ... In vivo labeling of GNE by
 GFP fusion may allow to measure dynamic parameters directly and
 to dissect functional domains essential for precise subcellular
 targeting.

  ... How GNE targeting and function are dynamically linked may
  help to develop a model of how sialic acid biosynthesis is
  regulated and promote our understanding of the pathogenesis of
  huma GNE-related disorders.


  I was trailing off from the first paragraph on Krauses
  discussion.
  @Krause2005 reports tissue distribution and subcellular
  compartmentalization of mammalian GNE. In their research they
  demonstrated tissue-specific regulation of GNE protein
  expression by Western blotting cerebrum, cerebellum, liver,
  skeletal muscle, thymus, ant testis in mouse (contains the
  highest amounts of GNE).

  @Krause2005 says that so far these studies were hampered by
  lack of an appropriate antiserum to GNE.


  GNE myopathy (OMIM 605820) is a rare genetic muscle disease
  characterized by progressive skeletal muscle atrophy due to
  mutation in GNE, the gene encoding the bifunctional enzyme due
  to mutations in GNE, the gene encoding the bifunctional enzyme
  UDP-N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) 2-epimerase/
  N-acetylmannosamine (ManNAc) kinase (EC:3.2.1.183, EC:2.7.1.60)
  (Fig. 1). 

    The above serves as
    reference to all
    relevant information
    about GNE myopathy
    with pointers to omim
    and enzyme ID.

  
